
-----File: 001.png---\\rosec5\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------


WORKS BY OCTAVIUS BROOKS FROTHINGHAM.

/*
The Religion of Humanity. 4th edition, 12mo, pp. 338. €1 50

"A profoundly sincere book, the work of one who has read largely, studied
thoroughly, reflected patiently."--<i>Boston Globe.</i>

Stories from the Lips of the Teacher. Retold by a Disciple.
Sixth edition, 16mo, pp. 193           $1 00

"It is in style and thought a superior book, that will interest young and old."--<i>Zion
Herald</i> (Methodist).

Stories of the Patriarchs. 3d edition. 16mo, pp. 232 . $1 00

"The sublimest lessons of manhood in the simple language of a child."--<i>Springfield
Republican.</i>

The Child's Book of Religion. For Sunday-Schools and Homes.
New edition, revised. 16mo, pp. xii.  273        $1 00

Transcendentalism in New England.  A History. Second
edition. 8vo, pp. iv. + 394           $1 75

"The book is masterly and satisfying."--<i>Appleton's Journal.</i>

The Cradle of the Christ.  A Study in Primitive Christianity.
8vo, pp. x. + 234        $1 50

"Scholarly, acute, and vigorous."--<i>N. Y. Tribune.</i>

Theodore Parker. A Biography. 8vo, pp. viii. + 588    2 00

Gerrit Smith. A Biography. 8vo, pp. 371        2 00

"A good biography, it is faithful, sufficiently full, written with vigor, grace,
and good taste."--<i>N. Y. Evening Post.</i>

Belief of the Unbelievers. 12mo, sewed          25

Speaking of Mr. Frothingham's Sermons, the <i>Springfield Republican</i> says:
"No one of serious intellectual character can fail to be interested and taught by
these most thoughtful discourses."

Boston Unitarianism. 1820-1840. A Study of the Life and Work
of Nathaniel Langdon Frothingham. 8vo, pp. 272        $1 75

"The book, to a thoughtful reader, cannot fail to be elevating and suggestive
of high ideals, high thinking, and noble living."--<i>Newark Advertiser.</i>

Recollections and Impressions. 1822-1890. 8vo.          $1 50
*/


G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS, <sc>New York and London</sc>
-----File: 002.png---\\rosec5\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------




/*
RECOLLECTIONS AND
IMPRESSIONS

1822-1890

OCTAVIUS BROOKS FROTHINGHAM

AUTHOR OF "BOSTON UNITARIANISM, 1820-1850, A STUDY OF THE LIFE
AND WORK OF NATHANIEL LANGDON FROTHINGHAM,"
"THE RELIGION OF HUMANITY," ETC., ETC.

G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS

NEW YORK   LONDON

27 WEST TWENTY-THIRD ST.  27 KING WILLIAM ST., STRAND

The Knickerbocker Press

1891
*/
-----File: 003.png---\\rosec5\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------




/*
<sc>COPYRIGHT, 1891</sc>

BY
OCTAVIUS BROOKS FROTHINGHAM

The Knickerbocker Press, New York

Electrotyped, Printed, and Bound by
G. P. Putnam's Sons
*/
-----File: 004.png---\\rosec5\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------




CONTENTS

/*
PAGE

I  --<sc>Parentage</sc>                1

II  --<sc>Education</sc>                19

III  --<sc>Divinity School</sc>                       25

IV  --<sc>Salem</sc>                    35

V  --<sc>The Crisis in Belief</sc>             53

VI  --<sc>Jersey City</sc>                65

VII  --<sc>New York</sc>                  76

VIII  --<sc>War</sc>                      104

IX  --<sc>The Free Religious Association</sc>         115

X  --<sc>The Progress of Religious Thought In
America</sc>                   133

XI  --<sc>The Clerical Profession</sc>           146

XII  --<sc>My Teachers</sc>               165

XIII  --<sc>My Companions</sc>               190

XIV  --<sc>My Friends</sc>                   225

XV  --<sc>The Present Situation</sc>                248

XVI  --<sc>The Religious Future of America</sc>      272

XVII  --<sc>Confessions</sc>                            289

<sc>Index</sc>                 303
*/
-----File: 005.png---\\rosec5\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------
[Blank Page]
-----File: 006.png---\\tunelera\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------




RECOLLECTIONS AND IMPRESSIONS.




I.

PARENTAGE.


My father was, as I have said elsewhere, a clergyman
in Boston, Massachusetts, a Unitarian minister
to the First Church, standing in a long line of men,
of whom the earliest was severely orthodox, while
he abhorred orthodoxy. Yet he was ordained without
hesitation, was more than acceptable to the best
minds through a service of thirty-five years, and continued
more and more unorthodox to the end; so
gradually and insensibly did the Puritan tenets disappear
one by one until the shadow of them only
remained. We are assured that by 1780 nearly all
the congregational pulpits were filled by Arminians.
In 1815, the year of my father's ordination, they
were well domesticated in New England, Calvinism
having lost its hold on the minds of thinking people,
and none but keen-eyed watchers on the tower seeing
what course opinion was taking. How far the tendency
towards the moral and practical view of religion
as distinct from the speculative view had gone,
-----File: 007.png---\\TIMP\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------------
is well illustrated in my father's case. He was a
man of excellent education, one of the best scholars
in a distinguished class at Harvard, an enthusiast
for intellectual cultivation, singularly refined in perception,
an acute critic, a careful, precise, elegant
writer. His tastes were pre-eminently literary. This
is said in full view of the fact that he was a learned
theologian, a pungent disputant, a zealous student
of biblical researches, a faithful pastor.

He was essentially a man of letters. His passion
was for the Latin classics. The best edition of
Cicero was on his shelves; the finest copy of Horace
graced his book-case. His knowledge of the Greek
literature and language was fair. He was fond of
poetry of a stately and romantic description; was,
himself, a poet of a gentle, meditative, spiritual cast,
especially eminent as a composer of hymns written
for church occasions, the dedication of meeting-houses,
the consecration of ministers, many of them
of permanent and general value, as both "liberal"
and "orthodox" collections attest; while he has
done as much as any man in his generation to
elevate, purify, and console delicate and serious
natures.

His library of about three thousand volumes was
exceedingly miscellaneous, illustrating the breadth
of his interests and the activity of his mind. There
were Bibles of choice editions and in every tongue.
There were biblical commentaries, dictionaries, grammars.
The Church Fathers were well represented.
-----File: 008.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
Church history was presented by its best narrators.
But the bulk of the collection was secular. It contained
copies of Addison, Johnson, Bayle, Carlyle,
Milton, Bacon, Dante, Dickens, Emerson, Grote,
Shakespeare, Goethe, Schiller, Hugo, Heeren, Hume,
Iriarte, Michelet, Lessing, Kingsley, Macaulay, Longfellow,
Plutarch, Pindar, Pope, Scott, Rousseau, Racine,
Rckert, Rabelais, Tasso, George Sand, Thucydides,
Theocritus, Virgil, Voltaire, Wieland, Pliny,
Wordsworth, Wilkinson, Zschokke, Walt Whitman.
They were very various. They commanded all extremes:
Augustine and Anacreon; Aratus and <i>Annual
Register</i>; schylus and Molire; Aristotle and
Herrick; Seneca and Horace; Antoninus and Almanacs;
Burton and Boccaccio. There was no pure
metaphysics--a compendium or two of philosophy,
a bit of Spinoza, of Kant, of Cousin, of Jouffroy,
of Malebranche, the "Dialogues" of Plato--nothing
of Schelling or Hegel. I find Proclus, and Jamblicus,
and Bhme, and dramatic literature in Greek,
Latin, French, German. Here is Burlamaqui on
Law, and Erasmus Darwin, and Godwin's "Memoirs
of Mary Wollstonecraft," and the Hitopadesa,
and the "Hymns" of Orpheus, and Palphatus,
together with many a forgotten book.

The favorite language next to English was German,
then came French, then Latin, which was
pretty well represented in its literature. Dr. Frothingham
was a wide reader, but his finest gift was a
power of penetrating to the heart of an author, a
-----File: 009.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
power that was akin to genius. He called himself a
<i>taster</i>. But every taster must take into his mouth
some things that are unpleasant, and he did. He
nibbled at Heine, but Heine's philosophy disgusted
him. He nibbled at Browning, but Browning's
lack of sensuous music did not satisfy his idea of
poetry. His mind, trained in the old school, could
not adapt itself to the new style of expression.

He gladly turned his back on doctrines he did
not like. He was spiritually minded, but soberly so,
as if to be spiritually minded belonged to a special
temperament; a Christian theist in all respects,
though indifferent to many details of Christian
doctrine; an optimist on principle as well as from
instinct, inclined to put the most cheerful construction
on the ways of divine Providence, and to look
patiently on the moral conditions of human life; an
unquestioning believer in Christ, immortality, the
need of revelation, the supremacy of the religious
and moral nature, the demand for the steady influence
of the spiritual world to enlighten mankind on
the truths of conscience no less than on the mysteries
of faith. He was no seer, gazing on things
unseen with the penetrating, inward eye; no prophet
possessed by an overwhelming conviction of the
absolute law; no regenerator believing that men
must be lifted up from the earth by an interior
renewal of soul; no reformer bent on changing the
circumstances of society. He was an apostle of air,
sunshine, and the mild, enticing summer shower
-----File: 010.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
which covered the wintry ground with the smiling
grass and the sweet-smelling flowers. Reformers, of
whatever school, were not to his taste, partly because
their methods seemed to him violent, but partly
also because their primary assumption that the
world was out of joint did not command his sympathy.
He could not think that the established institutions
of the age ought to be subverted, even
though they might be improved under enlightened
teaching. Socially he was conservative, although
by no means reactionary; disposed to see the soul
of good in things evil, though not always as studious
as one must needs be to "search it out." Rather he
took it for granted, and was often impatient with
those who felt keenly the evil but could not discover
the good.

High-minded he was rather than deep-souled;
devout in sentiment, chivalrously moral in principle
and in practice; ideal, poetic, delicate of sensibility,
but not soaring of spirit; certainly not a spiritual
enthusiast, as little a prosaic plodder; no mystic but
no disciple of "common-sense." For the dignity,
decency, purity, propriety of the clerical profession
he had great regard, but as much on account of its
social position as on account of its sanctity. It indicated
the highest type of gentlemanliness, the finest
style of personal character, a kind of exquisite courtliness
of manhood, humanity of a finished stamp of
elegance; and he resented everything like an admixture
of ordinary philanthropy. It was in his view a
-----File: 011.png---\\TIMP\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------------
descent to enter the arena of strife even for the purpose
of removing an evil. Thence his dislike of
Channing; his disapproval of Pierpont, otherwise a
particular favorite of his; his disagreement with
Parker, of whom he was fond. When the "Miscellanies"
were published the writer sent a copy to his
friend, who acknowledged the volume by a letter in
which expressions of personal affection were curiously
blended with antipathy towards the class of
speculations with which Mr. Parker was identified.
George Ripley and R. W. Emerson won and held his
attachment to the end, but he never visited Brook
Farm, and was deaf to solicitations to join the
Transcendental Club.

His friends were many and various--Emerson,
Ripley, Francis, Hedge, Bartol, Stetson, Parkman,
Longfellow, Felton, Hillard,--the list is long, for
the sunny temper of the man drew all hearts to him
and his warm affectionateness of disposition made
him tenacious of good-will. He was interested in
men as individuals not as members of a clique or
party, and was not repelled by differences of opinion
where his heart was engaged. On the whole, his
sympathies were with conservatives like George
Ticknor and W. H. Prescott, and the literary spirit
mainly kept him in association with those. Where
this spirit was wanting and there was divergence of
sentiment there was no attempt at intimacy.

Of interest in the denomination, the sect, the party
name, he was absolutely devoid. He never attended
-----File: 012.png---\\TIMP\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------------
the conventions or conferences of the Unitarian body
or spoke in their deliberations. On anniversary
week it was for many years his custom to visit New
York, where no professional responsibility rested
upon him, and where he could find recreations of
a purely social kind. But at the "Boston Association"
where he met friends one by one, and
could talk half confidentially, with perfect freedom,
in a conversational tone, he delighted to be
present.

For the rest, he was a man universally respected,
admired, and beloved, mirthful and sportive, more
than tolerant of gaiety, as a rule in excellent spirits,
though subject, as such temperaments usually are,
to moods of depression. Without private ambition
and utterly destitute of vanity, his uneventful days
were spent among his friends and his books. The
round of clerical duties was even and monotonous;
his calling had few excitements; even poverty had
limits, and social iniquity was manageable in those
times when relations were simple. The routine of
parochial service was such as a friendly man of
quick sympathies and ready speech could easily
discharge in a few hours of each week, nor was
the transition violent from it to the quiet library,
the companionship of Cicero, Shakespeare, Milton,
Walter Scott, Herder, Rckert. The love of art,
society, literature, was not inconsistent with a love
of the Saviour; and though as a matter of taste he
would not have spoken of a sonata of Beethoven in
-----File: 013.png---\\proved\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------
a sermon, there was nothing in his philosophy to
render secular allusions improper.

His literary predilections were somewhat at the
mercy of his sense of beauty, as if he had an eye to
artistic effect quite as much as to intellectual justice,
as if the firm lines of logical discernment were blurred
by the passion for poetic or scenic grace. Of the two
famous German writers about whom opinions were
divided, he greatly preferred Schiller to Goethe,
probably because the former was glorious, ardent,
declamatory. Of the two eminent English novelists
whom all the world was reading, Dickens was his
choice far above Thackeray, perhaps for the reason
that Dickens had color and warmth of sentiment,
while Thackeray seemed to him cold, skeptical, and
cynical. The flow of eloquence, the charm of dramatic
style made him relish authors as radically
unlike as Carlyle, Ruskin, and Macaulay, rendering
him unmindful of qualities in their cast of thought
which he might have disapproved of if less seductively
presented. When a lady objected to
Macaulay on the score of his material ethics,
Dr. Frothingham was too much captivated by
Macaulay's manner to criticise his philosophy, and
he let the philosophy go. It sometimes looked
as if the way in which things were said was of
more importance in his view than the things themselves;
but it was not so, for he could respond
to ideal sentiments when they offered themselves
fairly to his mind, and his moral indignation
-----File: 014.png---\\The Dougal\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
against an act of flagrant turpitude was quick
and hot.

With politics, whether speculative or practical, he
gave himself small concern, for in his day politics
were hardly an honorable calling. He belonged to
the Whig party, as it was then called, because it
comprised the greater number of educated men--scholars,
divines, lawyers, physicians, judges, and
people of consideration from their position in society.
The Republican party in Massachusetts was
not formed till his public life was nearly ended, and
we may doubt whether he would in any case have
connected himself with it, for its aims and purposes
were hardly such as he could have gone along with.
The well-known sentiment, ascribed to Wendell
Phillips, "Peace if possible, Truth at any rate,"
he would in all probability have reversed so as to
read, "Truth if possible, Peace at any rate"; not
because the search for truth was difficult, and peace
furnished the most promising conditions for finding
it, but because peace was preferable in itself as being
stable and quiet. He was not a fighter; he disliked
the noise of battle; his horror of anti-slavery agitation,
as of all other, was constitutional; and even if
he had been convinced of the slave's degradation, no
mode of redress that was proposed commended itself
to his gentle, apprehensive mind. To him the chief
interest of society was enlightenment associated
with refinement; the needed influence was that of
education. He was a delicately organized, sensitive
-----File: 015.png---\\The Dougal\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
man, fond of repose, happy in his temperament, in
his tastes, in his occupation, in his social position, in
his relationships, in his home. He had his disappointments
and sorrows like other men, but he did
not repine. His latter years were afflicted with
total blindness, accompanied by constant distress
and steadily increasing pain; but his friends never
failed to find him cheerful; the companion who ministered
to his daily necessities and culled from books
and periodicals the materials for his entertainment,
seldom had reason to complain of his petulance; the
visitor could with difficulty be brought to believe
that the man was living in the presence of death,
and was exposed to frightful phantoms due to a
slowly decomposing brain.

His sthetic tastes were active, as may be supposed,
and would have been keen if there had been
opportunity for cultivating them, and leisure to pursue
them. The pictures that adorned his parlor
walls were not distinguished as works of art, but
they were pure in sentiment, they showed a love of
color, and of the highest truth. There was not much
fine painting at that time in America, and what there
was required for its fair appreciation more training
and experience than was possessed by one immersed
in the cares of an exacting profession and interested
also in literary pursuits. Mr. Frothingham's artistic
taste was, besides, so much controlled by moral feeling
that he could not be critical of form. Of art
for its own sake he had no conception, and could
-----File: 016.png---\\The Dougal\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
have none, for that cry which voices the demands of
technical execution had not been raised; but even if
it had been he would have felt no sympathy with
any kind of excellence that was not directly associated
with the moral sentiment.

His taste in music was much like his taste in
painting,--that is to say, it was uneducated and unscientific.
To the great music,--that of the intellect
and the soul,--the compositions of the masters, of
Bach, Mozart, Beethoven, Mendelssohn, he was indifferent;
but the music of the heart, of feeling,
emotion, elevated passion,--the Scotch songs, the
Irish melodies, the English lays, madrigals, glees,
was his delight. He was especially fond of religious
airs. The oratorios of "The Creation" and
"The Messiah" he was never tired of hearing. His
voice was melodious, and he was fond of using it.
His organist taught him the principles of his own
art, and hours were spent at a parlor-organ in playing
favorite hymn-tunes, the melody of which he
sang as he played. He amused his children by trilling
nursery ditties, and joined his boys as they performed
glees from the "Orphean Lyre," sometimes
singing with the heart quite as much as with the
understanding. His joyous nature expressed itself
instinctively in song. His whole nervous system responded
to it. He was transported out of himself
by sweet strains, and fairly trembled under the influence
of divine harmonies.

Mr. Frothingham's love of dramatic art amounted
-----File: 017.png---\\The Dougal\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
to a passion, but the art must be high as well as
pure. Tragedy he did not like. All of the Shakespearian
plays he was critically familiar with, but he
loved "The Tempest" best, as uniting poetry with
cheerfulness in fullest measure. The lines he wrote
on the restoration of the Federal Street Theatre expressed
the depth of his interest. A religious
society, afterwards the "Central Church" in Winter
Street, was gathered here. Of this kind of
enterprise the poet says:

/*
More reverence than befits us here to tell,
We yield to courts where sacred honors dwell.
But have not they their places? Have not we?
Has not each liberal province leave to be?
*/

The "Lecture-Room" he had little respect for,
none at all for the "Variety Show." To every
device he wishes a cordial farewell, exclaiming:

/*
Restored! Restored! Well known so long a time,
These buried glories rise as in their prime.
Our tastes may change as fickle fashions-fly,
But art is safe: the Drama cannot die.
More than restored! Whate'er the pen since wrought
Of loftiest, sprightliest, here that wealth has brought.
Whate'er the progress of the age has lent
Of purer taste and comelier ornament,--
To this our temple it transfers its store,
And makes each point shine lovelier than before.
*/

But the drama must be clean:

/*
But more yet,--and how much! We claim a praise
The Playhouse knew not in the ancient days.
Own us, ye hearts with moral purpose warm!
Our word Renewal adds the word Reform.
*/
-----File: 018.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------

*/
Come, friends of Virtue! Share the feast we spread.
It loads no spirits, and it heats no head.
But rouses forth each power of mind and soul
With food ambrosial and its fairy bowl.


Hearts are improved by Feeling's play and strife;
Refined amusement humanizes life.
So wrote the Sages, whom the world admired;
So sang the Poets, who the world inspired;
Why in New England's Athens is decried
What old Athenian culture thought its pride?
*/

Thus Righteousness and Peace are made to kiss
each other. Art and Virtue walk hand in hand.
The sole condition is that art shall be virtuous and
that virtue shall be artistic. There was a singular
blending in his mind of the sacred and the secular.
Perhaps Matthew Arnold's definition of religion as
"morality touched with emotion" comes as near expressing
Dr. Frothingham's conception as any.
There must be morality; that is cardinal; that lies
at the foundation of all systems; that must be strict
and high. But emotion is indispensable also. This
runs into praise, the love of goodness, the worship
of the highest. This imparts warmth, glow, passion,
the upward lift that inspires. Morality alone is
cold, emotion alone is apt to be visionary. But the
two united propel the ship, one serving as ballast to
keep it steady, and one as sails to catch the winds of
heaven.
-----File: 019.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------

My mother was an example of pure character.
She laid no claim whatever to literary talent. Indeed
she had none. I cannot associate her with
books of any special description, but I can always
associate her with goodness, with humility, sincerity,
duty, kindness, pity, and simplicity. Truthfulness
was her great virtue, and was saved from bluntness
only by her delicate feeling for others and her inborn
politeness. The severest rebuke I ever received from
her was on account of a sharp arraignment of merchants
in a youthful sermon, which to her seemed presumptuous.
Her household cares, the nurture of her
children (she had seven, five sons and two daughters,
all of whom she trained most carefully like a devoted
mother), the family visitings, the parish calls,
missions among the poor, occupied the day. She
would sit for hours knitting or sewing, or in an armchair
before the coal fire silently musing. She was
quiet, reserved, old-fashioned in her sentiments, but
with a great fund of inward strength, which came
out on emergencies. I shall always remember her
ceaseless solicitude for an unfortunate elder brother
of mine who had for years been an anxiety and a
trouble. When he died in early manhood, after
nursing him tenderly, she softly closed his eyes, and
preserved the memory of him in her heart. Her
chamber window in the country looked upon his distant
grave, the little white stone over which kept
him before her eye who was always in her thoughts.

She accepted the existing order of things because
-----File: 020.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
it was established, disliking experiments, however
humane, for the reason that they had not been tested;
and if she had misgivings, she kept them to herself
not daring to set up her private feelings in opposition
to the will of the Supreme, the question whether
the existing order expressed the will of the Supreme
never being raised by her.

She was Unitarian, having so been taught, but
speculative matters were out of her reach as well as
uncongenial with her sphere. Her faith was of the
heart, and all the reason for it she had to give was an
uplifted life, "unspotted from the world." Of creeds
she knew nothing, not that she was deficient in mind,
but because they seemed to her to be affairs of criticism,
with which she had nothing to do. Her concern
was with practical things, and conduct was,
with her, more than seven eighths of life. Even the
very mild decoction of theology that was administered
from Sunday to Sunday in Chauncy Place was
sometimes too much for her. She was a practical
Christian, if there ever was one.

Her love of nature was genuine. As a young
woman she could distinguish the colors of a flying
bird. When she had a house of her own in the
country, she preferred a spot remote from the world
of society; went there as early as possible in the spring,
and stayed as late in the autumn as she could. She
delighted in the place; loved the air, the trees, the
smell of the ground. She enjoyed her garden; liked
to see plants grow. Every morning after break-*
-----File: 021.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
*fast she went out to inspect the grounds, and came
back laden with modest flowers; in the fall with
pine cones, the flame of which she enjoyed. On her
last evening, quite unaware of her coming end, she
sat on the piazza, and looked at the sunset, wrapped
in shawls, though it was midsummer, for she was
weak and emaciated but patiently tranquil.

Her habits were simple, not from parsimony but
from taste. She cared nothing for decoration or display.
She spent no more than was necessary on dress
or furniture. She was fond of old-fashioned, solid
things. In the midst of abundance, her appetite was
for plain food, yet she was no ascetic or prude, but
a largehearted, sensible woman, sober and serious
but genial too.

/Q
/R R:12
                             Browning makes Paracelsus say:
R/

/P
      'T is only when they spring to heaven that angels 
         Reveal themselves to you; they sit all day 
         Beside you, and lie down at night by you,-- 
      Who care not for their presence,--muse or sleep, 
         And all at once they leave you and you know them.
P/

    This is in a measure true. Death is a great revealer.
    Unfortunately it is a great deceiver also, putting wings on very
    earthly bodies. But in this instance, the qualities were all there
    in the living form, and all clearly visible to those who sat all
    day beside my mother. Death did but brush away a little film that
    hung before distant eyes.
Q/

Until near middle life I had the example and advice
of these dear spirits. It is my privilege to have
-----File: 022.png---\\Mawaki\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------
their blood in my veins. That was my best endowment,
and kept me always hopeful of a better future
in the time to come. The dream of a nobler age for
literature, art, science, humanity, came directly from
my father. The desire to do something to make the
dream an actual fact, to prove myself as of some
service in the world, came from my mother. His
was the love of intellectual liberty. Hers was the
passion for practical accomplishments. He was a
scholar. She was a worker.

Both had thoughts deeper than they could express.
Both were utterly sincere in their calling,
and the limitations of their age alone confined their
advance. The times were quiet then; the world
was small and disconnected; Boston was a little
place and shut off even from American cities by difficulties
of travel and by exorbitant rates of postage.
Thus responsibility was mainly confined to individuals.
There were no wearing duties; no perplexing
cares; even railroad disturbances did not worry, for
there was no railroad speculation, and no railroad
system. Hours were early, dinner was at two or
half-past, tea at six or seven, the evening ended at ten,
and was spent with books, melodious music, or playful
games of amusement, not of instruction. There were
few social gatherings; balls were very rare, seldom
lasting later than eleven o'clock. There was an
occasional concert, and here and there a theatre, but
there were no great dinner parties. Social problems
were exceedingly simple; the classes were divided by
-----File: 023.png---\\Mawaki\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------
lines that nobody attempted to pass over. Socialism
was unborn, and labor agitations were unknown.
In a word, there was such a thing as leisure, and this
was used chiefly for the cultivation of the mind.

My father was greatly interested in the education
of his boys; watched all their attainments; taught
them French; encouraged their learning how to box,
and fence, and swim; while my mother shed an atmosphere
of peace over the whole household. She made
one joke only, as far as my memory serves me,--and
I mention it here lest any one should suppose there
was a lack of sunshine in her nature. My father
was very fond of "vslauer," an Austrian red wine.
When the last bottle was produced my mother,
said archly, "your <i>face</i> will <i>lower</i> when it is all drunk
up." It was not much of a joke, but a small jest will
show the spirit of fun quite as well as a large one.

There was a singular combination of aspiration
with peace at that time. Probably there is as much
aspiration now as there was then, perhaps more;
but it is associated with social reform rather than
with personal perfection; there is peace, too, at the
present day, but it is harder to get at and needs to
be sought most often in private homes; the inward
peace is found in all periods.

How the principles then formed would bear the
strain of a later age or a larger sphere remained to
be proved. Fifty years ago the modern era with its
complications and perplexities could not even be
suspected. The foundations alone could then be laid.
-----File: 024.png---\\Mawaki\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------




II.

EDUCATION.


Of the primary schools it is unnecessary to speak.
They were of the same kind that were established
in Boston at that period. Indeed I can recollect but
two, one, a child's school of boys and girls, kept by
a Miss Scott, at the corner of Mt. Vernon Street and
Hancock; the other a boys' school kept by a Mr.
Capen, a poor hump-backed cripple who could not get
out of his chair, but wheeled himself about the room,
and kept on his table a cowhide, which was pretty
generously exercised. The school was on Bedford
Street behind the "Church of Church Green." A
little alley-way ran along in the rear of the church
through which I used to go to the school-house.

The Latin School was an old institution brought
hither by Rev. John Cotton, who remembered the
Free Grammar School founded in Lincolnshire,
England, by Queen Mary, in which Latin and Greek
were taught. It was established here, in 1635, five
years after the landing of Winthrop, two or three
years before Harvard College. When I was there,
it stood on School Street, opposite the Franklin
-----File: 025.png---\\Mawaki\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------
statue. It had a granite front and a cupola. The
head-master was Charles K. Dillaway, an excellent
scholar, a faithful teacher, an agreeable man. He had
to resign in consequence of ill-health. The tutors
were Henry W. Torrey and Francis Gardner, who
afterwards became head-master. Both were pupils of
the school. Mr. Frederick P. Leverett, author of
the Latin Lexicon, was chosen to succeed Mr. Dillaway,
but died before assuming the office. The next
head-master, during my course, was Epes Sargent
Dixwell a most accomplished man, an elegant scholar,
a gentleman of the world, very much interested, as
I remember, in the plastic art of Greece. He is still
living, and amuses himself by writing Greek. Mr.
Dixwell held office till 1851, when he established a
private school. The discipline of the Latin School
was strict but mild. Corporal punishment was the
unquestioned rule, but it was never harshly administered,
though the knowledge that it might be undoubtedly
did a good deal toward stimulating the
ambition of the scholars. Here and there no doubt
a boy exasperated the teacher by idleness or disorder;
possibly at moments the teacher was nervous
and irritable. I recollect a single instance in which
he was over-sensitive, too prone to take offence,
which fastened suspiciously upon some individual
scholar; but injustice was a very rare occurrence.
We learned Greek and Latin, the rudiments of algebra,
writing and declamation; but the best part of
the education I received in those days was an atmos-*
-----File: 026.png---\\Mawaki\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------
*phere of elegant literature, derived from friends of
my father. I used to see William H. Prescott taking
his walk on Beacon Street, in the sun, and have
often sat in his study in his tranquil hours, and heard
him talk. The beautiful library of George Ticknor,
at the head of Park Street, was open to me, and I can
see his form now as he walked on the Common.
George S. Hillard, the elegant man of letters, was a
familiar figure on the street. Charles Sumner, then
a young law student, strode vigorously along, his
manner even then suggesting the advent of a new
era.

In 1846, I listened to his oration before the Phi
Beta Kappa Society of Harvard University on the
Scholar [Pickering]; the Jurist [Story]; the Artist
[Allston]; the Philanthropist [Channing]; and his
bold declamation was strangely in contrast with the
academical gown that he wore. Daniel Webster
used to stalk by our house, the embodiment of the
Constitution, the incarnation of law, the black locomotive
of the train of civilization. Ralph Waldo
Emerson often sat at my father's table diffusing the
radiance of serene ideas, and heralding the diviner
age that was to come.

From the Latin School to Harvard College was an
easy transition. There existed an impression that
Latin-School boys might take their ease for the first
year at Cambridge, because they were so well prepared,
but I found enough to do; there was the
great library, there were the advanced studies, there
-----File: 027.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
was the more perfect training. The President was
Josiah Quincy, the elder. Henry W. Longfellow
was professor of modern languages; Cornelius C.
Felton, the ardent philhellene, taught Greek; Charles
Beck, a German, taught Latin; Benjamin Peirce was
professor of mathematics; James Walker was an instructor
in intellectual and moral philosophy; Joseph
Lovering, teacher in chemistry. Among the tutors
were Bernard Roelker, in German; Pietro Bachi, in
Italian; Francisco Sales, in Spanish.

The new buildings now in the college yard were
not erected; Holworthy (1812), Stoughton (1804-1805),
Hollis (1763), Harvard (1766), Holden (1734),
Massachusetts Hall (1720), University Hall (1812-1813)
were in existence. There were no athletics;
there was no gymnasium; there was no boating;
there was little base-ball. There were few literary
societies; so that we were driven back mainly upon
intellectual labor. The professors' houses were
always open, and there was choice society in the
town. I recollect particularly well going to the
house of John White Webster, who was executed
later for the murder of Dr. Parkman. He was very
fond of music and had a daughter who sang finely,
besides being handsome. She afterwards married
Mr. Dabney, of Fayal. The Doctor was a nervous
man, high strung, but good-natured and polite.
His fatal encounter with Dr. Parkman I always
attributed to a sudden outbreak of passion.

Within the grounds of the college we were quite
-----File: 028.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
studious, companionable among ourselves. There
was no rioting, no excess of any kind. Walking and
swimming in the river Charles were our chief recreations.
Connection with Boston was infrequent and
difficult, as there was no railroad. The Sundays
could be passed in the city if the student brought a
certificate that he went regularly to church; otherwise
it was expected that the First Church, or one
of the others, should be frequented. The instruction
was of a cordial, friendly, courteous, and humane
kind; the professors were enthusiastic students in
their departments. I well recollect Professor Longfellow's
kindness; Professor Felton's ardor (I visited
Pompeii with him in 1853). Charles Beck was a
burning patriot in the war. Pietro Bachi's great
eyes lighted up and glowed as he talked about Dante.
Bernard Roelker afterwards became a lawyer in
New York. Charles Wheeler and Robert Bartlett,
tutors, both rare spirits, died young. On the whole,
life at Harvard College was exceedingly pleasant,
and a real love of learning was implanted in young
men's bosoms.

The corner-stone of Gore Hall was laid in 1813.
The books were moved into the library in the summer
vacation of 1814. There were forty-one thousand
volumes at that time.

In the early part of my career, I took my meals in
Commons, at an expense of two dollars and a quarter
a week, the highest price then paid. Commons was
abolished for a time in 1849, it being found difficult
-----File: 029.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
to satisfy the students, who for some years had
boarded in the houses in the neighborhood.

There were excitements too. Though there was
no gymnasium, or boating, and little foot-ball, base-ball,
or cricket (these games were all very simple
and rudimentary), there were the clubs, the "[Greek frat letters Alpha delta phi],"
still a secret society, and occupying a back upper
room, to which we mounted by stealth,--the same
room serving for initiations and sociables,--was exceedingly
interesting in a literary point of view. There
were papers on Scott, Byron, Wordsworth, delightful
conversations, anecdotes, songs.

The "Institute of 1770" taught us elocution, and
readiness in debate; the "[**greek frat letters phi beta kappa]," no longer a secret
society, and no longer actively literary, hung over us
like a star, stimulating ambition and inciting us to
excellence in scholarship.

Altogether it was a delightful life; a life between
boyhood and manhood; of purely literary ambition,
of natural friendship. There was no distinction of
persons, no affected pride. We found our own level,
and kept our own place. Money did not distinguish
or family, only brains. There was no care but for
intellectual work; there was no excess save in study.
Expenses were small, indulgences were few and
simple. The education was more suited to those
times than to these, when culture must be so much
broader, and social expectations demand such varied
accomplishments.
-----File: 030.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------




III.

DIVINITY SCHOOL.


To enter at once the Divinity School was to start
on a predestined career. From childhood I was
marked out for a clergyman. This was taken for
granted in all places and conversations, and my own
thoughts fell habitually into that groove. There
was nothing unattractive in the professional career
as illustrated by my father. I was the only one of
a large family of brothers who pursued the full
course of studies at Cambridge, or who showed a
taste for the scholastic life. An appetite for books
rather than for affairs pointed first of all to a literary
calling, while a fondness for speculative questions,
a leaning towards ideal subjects, and a serious turn
of mind naturally suggested at that time the pulpit.
An inward "experience of religion," which in some
other communions was regarded as essential to the
character of a minister of the gospel, was not demanded.
Religion was rather moral and intellectual
than spiritual, a matter of mental conviction
more than of emotional feeling. The clerical profession
stood very high, higher than any of the three
-----File: 031.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
"learned professions," by reason of its requiring in
larger measure a tendency towards abstract thought,
an interest in theological discussions, and a steady
belief in doctrines that concerned the soul. Literature
was not at that period a profession; there was
no Art to speak of except for genius of the first
order like that of Allston or Greenough. Men of
the highest intellectual rank, whatever they may
have become afterwards, tried the ministry at the
start. The traditions of New England favored the
ministerial calling. The great names, with here and
there an exception, were names of divines. The
great books were on subjects of religion; the popular
interest centred in theological controversy; the
general enthusiasm was aroused by preachers; the
current talk was about sermons. The clergy was
a privileged class, aristocratic, exalted.

Divinity Hall had been dedicated in August,
1826. It was situated on an avenue about a quarter
of a mile from the college yard. It contained, besides
thirty-seven chambers for the accommodation
of students, a chapel, a library, a lecture-room, and
a reading-room; it stood opposite the Zological
Museum. Before it was a vacant space used for
games. Behind it was meadow land reaching all
the way to Mr. Norton's. Just beyond it was Dr.
Palfrey's residence. George Rapall Noyes, D.D.,
was elected in May, 1840, with the title of "Hancock
Professor of Hebrew and Oriental Languages, and
Dexter Lecturer on Biblical Literature." He had al-*
-----File: 032.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
*ready translated the poetical books of the Old Testament,
and it was his eminence as a translator which
had won him fame while a minister at Petersham.
It was his duty also to explain the New Testament,
and in addition to give lectures in systematic theology.
Besides all this he was to preach in the
college chapel a fourth of the year. He steadily
grew in the respect and attachment of the young
men; his authority in the lecture-room was very
great; his opinions were carefully formed and precisely
delivered; and his shrewd, practical wisdom
was long remembered by his pupils. Convers
Francis, D.D., appointed to the "Parkman Professorship,"
after the resignation of Henry Ware, Jr.,
was his associate. The branches assigned to him
were ecclesiastical history, natural theology, ethics,
the composition of sermons, and instruction in the
duties of a pastor; besides all this he was to preach
half of the time in the college chapel. Dr. Francis
was an accomplished scholar and a faithful teacher.
The best man, too, for his position, at a time when
in an unsectarian school it was exceedingly desirable
that the professors should harmonize all tendencies;
for with a strong sympathy with "transcendentalism,"
as it was then called, he had been a most successful
parish minister, a very acceptable preacher,
and a man in whom all the churches had confidence.

At Cambridge, owing to the influence of Buckminster,
Ware, and Norton, Unitarian opinion prevailed,
though the controversial period had passed
-----File: 033.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
by when I was there. The clouds of warfare no
longer discharged lightning; there was no roll of
thunder; only a faint muttering betrayed the former
excitement; and the memory of old conflicts hovered
round the spots where the fights had been hottest.
Marks of strife were still visible on texts,
and chapters were scarred with wounds. Comment
still lingered near the passages where polemics had
raged, and the blood burned as we read the tracts or
studied the essays of the champions we admired.

It was impossible to forget the interpretations
that had been given to words or phrases. A strictly
scientific study, either of the Bible or the creed, was
therefore out of the question. But the course of
exercises was broad, generous, inclusive, as far as
this was feasible. The bias was decidedly unorthodox,
yet without the bitter temper of opposition.
The old system was rather set aside than attacked.
It was assumed to have been vanquished in the fair
field. The professors were liberal in their views. A
small but serviceable library furnished the students
with a certain amount of needed material, the college
library was freely opened to them, and the
collections of the professors were gladly placed at
their disposal. The days were fully occupied with
lectures, recitations, discussions, exercises in writing
out and taking of notes. Once a week there was a debate
on some general theme not connected with the
topics of the class-room; and at the latter part of the
course there was special training in the composition
-----File: 034.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
and delivery of sermons, accompanied by a brief
experience of extemporaneous speaking. The Unitarian
ministry was alone contemplated; no wide
divergence from it was encouraged, and the conservative
methods of interpretation were the ones
recommended. Some knowledge of Greek and Latin
being presupposed, the study of Hebrew was made
the one study of language, and this was pursued
with the best available helps. Biblical criticism
naturally took a prominent place in the current
curriculum, under the guidance of the most distinguished
authorities; books of every school were
recommended, whether old or new, Catholic or
Protestant, "conservative" or "liberal," Horne, Tholuck,
De Wette being consulted in turn. The New
Testament and "Historical Christianity" were taken
for granted; and these meant belief in miracles,
which were defended against rising objections of
the Strauss and Paulus schools, the former holding
by the "mythical" theory, the latter favoring the
notion of a natural explanation of some sort. The
hostility towards rationalism was decided. This
was forty years ago, before the "historical method,"
as it was called, instituted by Baur, Schwegler,
Zeller, Sneckenburger, and the <i>Theologische Jahrbcher</i>,
had any expositor in this country, long
before the Dutch school, the later French school--Kuenen,
Reville, Reuss, Nicolas, Renan,--came out.
The great issue was the credibility of the miracles
of the Old and New Testaments.
-----File: 035.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------

The half-monastic life we led at Divinity Hall cut
us off a good deal from social amenities, reform agitations,
attempts to change institutions, and even
from the deeper currents of religious sentiment.
None but the very observant took note of Brook
Farm, or heeded the movements in behalf of Association
that were going on in other communities.
Whatever was outside of the "Christian" ministry
concerned us but little. The professors did not
direct our eyes to the mountain tops or call attention
to the bringers of good tidings from other quarters
than the Christian Revelation, as explained by
its scholars and writers. Even such a phenomenon
as Emerson did not make a profound impression on
the average mind.

A tone of old-fashioned piety pervaded the establishment.
A weekly prayer-meeting, always attended
by one of the professors, though officially rather
than as a stimulator, was much in the manner and
spirit of similar exercises at Andover. The students
were cautioned against excessive intellectualism.
Several of them spent their Sundays in teaching
classes of the young in the neighboring towns, in
ministering to the sick in hospitals, or in carrying
the monitions of conscience to the criminals in the
prison at Charlestown. The aims of a practical ministry
were thus kept in view as well as the circumstances
of the time permitted. Of course the school
could not be a philanthropic institution any more
than it could be independent or scientific. It was
-----File: 036.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
committed to a special purpose, which was the supply
of Christian pulpits with instructed, earnest,
devoted men. That they should be Unitarians was
expected; that they should be Christians in belief
was demanded. There were two ever-present spectres,
"orthodoxy" and "rationalism," the one represented
by Andover, the other by Germany. Audacity of speculation
when unaccompanied by practical piety was
discountenanced, and in flagrant instances rebuked.

The literal form of the orthodox creed, it need
hardly be said, was made more prominent than its
imaginative aspect. This was inevitable, for the
object was to assail it rather than to understand it.
To be perfectly fair to all sides was, under the circumstances,
not to be expected at a period so near
the era of controversy. An earnest, ingenuous
youth could find at Cambridge all the courage and
impulse he needed, for the atmosphere of the place
was neither chilling nor depressing. The less emotional,
more intellectual scholar was left to pursue
his studies undisturbed, the wind of spiritual feeling
not being strong enough to carry him away.

In a word, the institution was all that could have
been looked for in a time when ecclesiastical and
doctrinal traditions were fatally though not confessedly
broken, and naked individualism was not
avowedly adopted. The task of the professors,
conscientious, hard working, utterly faithful men,
was laborious, difficult, and thankless. The Unitarian
public, fearing a tendency to unbelief, gave
-----File: 037.png---\\The Dougal\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
them a grudging confidence; the students, I am
afraid, were not considerate of them,--the zealous
finding them lukewarm, the cold-blooded blaming
them for stopping short of the last consequences of
their own theory. It is wonderful that the school
went on at all. The single-minded devotion of the
teachers alone preserved it. Looking thoughtfully
back across a wide gulf of years, the writer of these
pages feels that he owes this tribute to Convers
Francis and George R. Noyes. How often he has
wished he could take them by the hand and ask
their forgiveness for his frequent misjudgment of
them, misjudgment the remembrance of which makes
his heart bleed the more as he can only think of
their generous forbearance. Their influence was
emancipating and stimulating. They were friendly
to thought. Under their ministration the mind took
a leap forward towards the confines of the Christian
system of faith. What the divinity school of the
future may be able to accomplish it would be hazardous
to conjecture. It could hardly then have
done more than it did.

The study of comparative religions, so zealously
prosecuted within a few years, together with a desire
to do perfect justice to orthodox doctrines, may
render practical a scientific review of theological
systems, but in this event a predilection in favor of
a separate "Christian" ministry can be no longer
characteristic of a divinity school which proposes to
prepare young men for the clerical calling.
-----File: 038.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------

The three years of secluded life passed quickly
away. The trial sermon in the village church was
delivered and criticised. The President of the college
then was Edward Everett, my uncle. The next
morning I went to his office; he spoke warmly of
my sermon, but advised me henceforth to commit
sermons to memory as he did. This I tried two or
three times, but the effort to write the sermons so
fatigued me that the task of committing them to
memory was too great, and for years I wrote my
discourses, until for convenience'[**missing s?] sake I learned to
preach without notes. The diploma was bestowed,
the actual ministry was begun. The term of preaching
as a candidate did not last long. By the advice
of friends an invitation was accepted to an old established
conservative parish in Salem, Mass. Ordination
and marriage soon followed, and public life was
inaugurated under the most promising conditions.
I had the best wishes of the conservative portion of
the community to which I was, properly, supposed
to belong, and the hopes of the radical portion who
anticipated a change of view as time went on, and I
was brought into sharper collision with prevailing
habits of thought than was possible at Cambridge,
where the student was in a great measure cut off
from intercourse with the world.

At the "Divinity School" I was known as a
young man with conservative ideas. I remember
now discussions, essays, criticisms, in which the opinions
in vogue among old-fashioned Unitarians were
-----File: 039.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
defended somewhat passionately against the more
daring convictions of my companions. In especial
my faith was in direct opposition to the spiritual
philosophy; Strauss was a horror; Parker was a
bugbear; Furness seemed an innovator; Emerson
was a "Transcendentalist," a term of immeasurable
reproach. All this was soon to pass away, and I
was to go a great deal beyond even Parker. The
word "Transcendentalist" ceased to be a synonym
for "enthusiast." The philosophy of intuition was
first literally adopted, then dismissed, and I came
out where I least expected. But I well remember,
one evening as I was walking out from Boston, presenting
to myself distinctly the alternative between
the adoption of the old and the new. I am afraid
that the old commended itself by its venerableness,
the solidity of its traditions, and the authority of its
great names, while the new was still vague and formless.
I then and there decided to follow in the
footsteps of my fathers, a course more in sympathy
with the prevailing temper of the age and with the
current of thought at Divinity Hall, though Emerson
had delivered his address some years before,
and the New Jerusalem was even then coming down
from heaven.
-----File: 040.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------




IV.

SALEM.


Old Salem was a city of the imagination. History
does it no justice. The "Essex Institute," founded
in 1848, by the union of the "Essex County Historical
Society" and the "Essex County Natural
History Society," has a very fine collection of books,
pamphlets, manuscripts, an invaluable museum, relics,
pictures, so that in no locality in the country
has so much been accomplished in exhuming the
treasures of municipal and civil history, and in
bringing to light antiquities. Hurd's "History of
Essex County," published in 1888, with its monographs
on commerce, religion, literature, newspapers,
etc., written by thoroughly competent men, throws
a flood of light on the past of the place. Mr. Upham's
"Memoir of Francis Peabody," published in
1868, gives an admirable account of the literary
eminence of the old town. Colonel Higginson's
article in <i>Harper's Monthly</i> on "Old Salem's Sea
Captains," published in September, 1886, gives
something of its romantic character. But best of all
as illustrating this feature are the articles written
-----File: 041.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
by "Eleanor Putnam" (Mrs. Arlo Bates), and republished
after her death under the title of "Old
Salem," in 1887. She was about thirty years old
when she died; but if she had lived she would have
presented the old city in its quaintest aspect. Her
love of antiquarian research, her taste, her devotion
to Salem qualified her in an eminent degree for her
self-appointed task.

There can hardly be a doubt that the origins of
the town were religious; that a religious purpose,
deep though undefined and undeclared, animated
the emigrants before Winthrop. The very name,
Salem, the Hebrew for peacefulness, instead of
"Naumkeag" (the old Indian name), adopted in
1628, to commemorate the reconciliation between
the company of Roger Conant and that of John
Endicott, was already suggestive of spiritual qualities.
Eminent forms loom up in the distance: Francis
Higginson, the first minister of Massachusetts Bay;
Roger Williams, whose name is identified with
"soul freedom"; Hugh Peters, his opponent. John
Endicott was a most imposing figure; hasty, rash,
choleric (as was shown by his striking a man in
early life), imperious, but brave and bold. He was
a stern Puritan, hating popery so much that he cut
out the image of the king from the English banner,
because it was an image, while at the same time he
persecuted the Quakers, because they advocated
obedience to the "inner light" and were disturbers
of the established peace. But he had sweeter quali-*
-----File: 042.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
*ties--gentleness, generosity, and kindness. An old
scripture (Ecclesiasticus xi., 28) says: "Judge none
blessed before his death; for a man shall be known
in his children." The descendants of John Endicott
are graceful, elegant, refined people, lovely in manners,
gentle in disposition. The root of these qualities
must have been in the forefather two centuries
and a half ago. The intellectual history of the city
is very illustrious and began early. A strong intellectual
bent characterized the early settlers, who
were persons of inquisitive minds, addicted to experiments
and enterprises, exceedingly ingenious. Near
the middle of the last century there was in existence
in Salem a social evening club, composed of eminent
cultivated and accomplished citizens. On the evening
of Monday, March 31, 1760, a meeting was
held at the Tavern House of a Mrs. Pratt for the
purpose of "founding in the town of Salem a handsome
library of valuable books, apprehending the
same may be of considerable use and benefit under
proper regulations." The books imported, given, or
bought, amounted to four hundred and fifteen volumes.
This society, which may be regarded as the
foundation of all the institutions and agencies established
in this place to promote intellectual culture,
was incorporated in 1797. In 1766, the famous
Count Rumford was an apprentice here. In 1781,
Richard Kirwan, LL.D., of Dublin, an eminent
philosopher of the period, had a valuable library in
a vessel which was captured by an American private
-----File: 043.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
armed ship and brought into Beverly as a prize. The
books were given by Dr. Kirwan, who would accept
no gratuity and was delighted that his volumes were
put to so good a use. The books were sold to an
association of gentlemen in Salem and its neighborhood,
and formed the "Philosophical Library." This
and the "Social Library" were afterwards consolidated
into the "Salem Athenum," which was incorporated
in March, 1810.

Among the distinguished men were William H.
Prescott, Benjamin Peirce, Nathaniel Hawthorne,
John Lewis Russell, Charles Grafton Page, and Jones
Very. Here lived Edward Augustus Holyoke, president
of the Massachusetts Medical Society and the
American Academy of Arts and Sciences; Timothy
Pickering, Rev. John Prince, Rev. William Bentley,
Nathaniel Bowditch, author of the "Practical Navigator"
and translator of the "Mecanique Celeste";
John Pickering, Joseph Story, of the Supreme Bench;
Daniel Appleton White, Leverett Saltonstall, Benjamin
Merrill, and many another man of accomplishments
and learning. Even the uneducated, and
those engaged in the common occupations of everyday
life, gratified their love of knowledge, and followed
up, for their private enjoyment, researches in
intellectual and philosophical spheres; apothecaries
and retail shopkeepers distinguished themselves as
writers; one of them--Isaac Newhall by name--was
reputed the author of the famous "Junius Letters,"
thus enjoying companionship with Burke, Gibbon,
-----File: 044.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
Grattan, Camden, Chatham, Chesterfield, and other
distinguished writers.

Its commercial history was exceedingly brilliant.
In its palmy days it had more trade with the East
Indies than all the other American ports put together.
Its situation by the sea encouraged maritime adventure.
From its very infancy its inhabitants sent
vessels across the Atlantic of forty to sixty tons, and
followed up the trade with Spain, France, Italy, and
the West India Islands. In the war of the Revolution
it sent out one hundred and fifty-eight armed
ships, mounting at least two thousand guns, and carrying
not less than six thousand men. In 1785, Salem
sent out the first vessel to the Isle of France, Calcutta,
and China; she began also the trade to the other
ports of the East Indies and Japan; to Madagascar
and Zanzibar, Brazil and Africa. In the south seas,
Salem ships first visited the Fiji Islands; they
first opened up to our commerce New Holland and
New Zealand. In the war of 1812 she had two
hundred and fifty privateers. When the war was
over, these vessels were engaged in the merchant
service. Mr. E. H. Derby, one of the great merchants,
said to be the richest man in America, sent out thirty-seven
vessels in fourteen years, making a hundred
and twenty voyages. The names of the great merchants,
E. H. Derby, N. Silsbee, William Gray, Peabody,
Crowningshield, Pickman, Cleveland, Cabot,
Higginson, are of universal celebrity. Then Derby
Street was alive with sea-captains, the custom-house
-----File: 045.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
was active, the tall warehouses were full of treasures,
the great East Indiamen fairly made the air fragrant
as they unloaded their merchandise. To quote the
language of "Eleanor Putnam": "There was poetry
in the names of the vessels--the ship <i>Lotus</i>, the
<i>Black Warrior</i>, the brig <i>Persia</i>, the <i>Light Horse</i>,
the <i>Three Friends</i>, and the great <i>Grand Turk</i>.
There was, too, a charm about the cargoes. They
were no common-place bales of merchandise, but
were suggestive in their very names of the sweet,
strange odors of the East, from which they came.
There was food for the imagination in the mention
of those ship-loads of gum copal from Madagascar
and Zanzibar; of hemp and iron from Russia; of
Bombay cotton; of ginger, pepper, coffee, and sugar
from India; of teas, silks, and nankeens from China;
salt from Cadiz; and fruits from the ports of the
Mediterranean."

Miss Putnam speaks of the gorgeous fans, the
carved ivory, the blue Canton china, the generous
tea-cups, the tureens, the heavy tankards, the Delft
jars, the ancient candle-sticks, the heavy punch bowls,
the strange beads, suggestive of the Hindoo rites,
Nautch dances, and women with dusky throats.
Then the very air was weighty with romantic adventures.
We read with awe of cashmere shawls hanging
on clothes lines, of jars full of silver coin, of the
gilded fishes on the side of each stair, of the grand
staircase in the front hall of Mr. Pickman's house on
Essex Street, of logs of sandal-wood. The museum
-----File: 046.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
of the East India Marine Society contains sceptres
from the Fiji Islands; a musical instrument from
New South Wales, another from Borneo; a carved
statue of a rich Persian merchant of Bombay; an
alabaster figure of a Chinese Jos; a copper idol from
Java; a mirror from Japan; fans from Maraba, the
Marquesas Islands, Calcutta; cloth from Otaheite;
an earthen patera from Herculaneum; two dresses
of women from the Pelew Islands; sandal-wood from
the Sandwich Islands; a parasol from Calcutta; nutmegs
from Cayenne; thirty-six specimens of Italian
marble; cement from the palace of the Csars at
Rome; white marble from Carthage; porphyry from
Italy; beads worn by the Pundits and Fakirs in India;
a glass cup from Owyhee; Verde Antico from
Sicily; sandal-wood tapers from China; wood images
of mummies from Thebes; a silver box from Soo-Soo;
porphyry from Madagascar; a piece of mosaic from
ancient Carthage; silk cocoons from India; marble
from the temple of Minerva at Athens; piece of
pavement from the site of ancient Troy; and polished
jasper from Siberia.

When I was in Salem, from 1847 to 1855, this
splendor had departed. Derby Street was deserted,
the great warehouses were tenements for laborers.
Hawthorne has described the custom-house in his
famous preface to the "Scarlet Letter." The sailors
had disappeared; the commerce, owing mainly to
the shallowness of the water in the harbor, had gone
to Boston and New York. But traces of the old
-----File: 047.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
glory still lingered. Here and there a great merchant
was seen on the streets. Some of the old
houses remained: the Pickering House on Broad
Street, built in 1651; the Turner House; Roger
Williams' house, at the corner of Essex and North
Streets, built before 1634; and Mr. Forrester's
house.

As the chairman of the Salem Lyceum, it was my
privilege to entertain such men as R. W. Emerson,
George W. Curtis and others. Thomas Starr King,
when he lectured in Danvers, drove over to my
house, and spent the rest of the evening. Nathaniel
Hawthorne I used to meet frequently on the street.
I often saw Mrs. Hawthorne leading her children by
the hand. Mr. Hawthorne, who was in Salem from
1846 to 1849, was remarkable for his shyness. His
favorite companions were some Democratic politicians,
who met weekly at the office of one of them,
where he occupied himself in listening to their talk,
but he avoided cultivated people. On one occasion
a friend of mine asked us to meet him at dinner;
twice he went to remind his guest of the engagement.
The hour arrived, the dinner was kept waiting
half an hour for Mr. Hawthorne to come. He
said but little during the dinner, and immediately
afterward got up and went away; his reluctance to
meet people overcoming his sense of propriety.

My church, the "North Church," as it was called,
was a handsome building on the main street, a stone
structure with a tower, and a green before it. It
-----File: 048.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
was founded in 1772 by people who had left the
First Parish by reason of great dissatisfaction. The
first minister, called in 1773, was Thomas Barnard.
He was a broad-minded, liberal man, and left the
church substantially Unitarian. His successor was
J. E. Abbot, called in 1815, whose ministry, from
ill-health, was very short. My predecessor, John
Brazer, a cultivated, scholarly, sensitive man, a good
preacher, an excellent pastor, was settled in 1820.
My ministry there was exceedingly pleasant and
tranquil for several years. There were long hours
for studying; the parish work was not hard; the
people were honest, quiet, sober, some of them exceedingly
refined and gentle; it was as if the old
Puritan spirit, modified by time, still lingered about
the old town. Family life was beautiful to see; the
homes were charming; there was luxury enough;
there was great intelligence, singular activity of
mind; and I remember well the bright conversations,
the entertainments, the teas, the dinners, the
receptions, the social meetings. The women, especially,
were distinguished for interest in literary
matters. Many interesting people still lived in the
town, Daniel Appleton White, for instance, Dr.
Treadwell, Benjamin Merrill, Thomas Cole; some of
these were my parishioners and all were my friends.
But the life was almost too quiet for me, as circumstances
presently proved.

At the same time, as if to render impossible my
further ministration in this first place of service, the
-----File: 049.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
anti-slavery agitation was at its height, dividing
churches, breaking up sects, setting the members of
families against each other, detaching ministers from
their congregations, and arraying society in hostile
camps. The noise of the conflict filled the air. It
was impossible to evade the issue. Those who had
fixed positions in the community, were of a tranquil
temperament, or of an easy conscience, might survey
the battle calmly, or be vexed only by the confusion
in the social world; but they who had the future
still before them could not but feel the necessity of
taking sides in the quarrel. When Garrison, the
incarnate conscience, was enunciating the moral law
and illustrating it by flaming texts from the Old
Testament; when the intrepid Phillips was throwing
the light of history on politics, and putting
statesmanship in the face of humanity, judging all
men by the maxims of ethical philosophy; when
Parker was proclaiming the absolute justice, and
Clarke was applying the truths of the eternal love;
and many others, men and women, were thundering
forth the divine vengeance on iniquity; when facts
were set out for everybody's reading, and tongues
were unloosed, and fiery messages proceeded from all
mouths, and conviction was deep, and eloquence was
stirring, it was impossible to be still.

Now the situation is changed; the evil is removed;
the wound has healed; the surgeon's knife has been
put up in its case. A new philosophy is disposed to
blame the action of the anti-slavery champions. Some
-----File: 050.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
critics have doubted whether the conduct of the
abolitionists was wise; whether their primary assumption
of the political equality of all men was
correct; whether a race that had never founded
a government or contributed to the advance of civilization
could add any weight to the cause of liberty.
But then such misgivings could not be raised. The
abolitionists seemed to have on their side the precepts
of the New Testament, the teachings of the
Sermon on the Mount, the character and example of
Jesus, the burning language of prophecy, the inspiring
traditions of primitive Christianity, the humane
instincts of the heart, the moral sentiments of equity,
pity, compassion, all reinforced by the growing
democratic opinion of the age, and by the tenets of
the intuitive philosophy then coming to the front.
The glowing passages from Isaiah and from Matthew:
"Let the oppressed go free; break every
yoke"; "Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the
least of these, ye did it unto me," shone in our eyes.
To the anti-slavery people belonged the heroic virtues,
courage, faithfulness, and sacrifice. Theirs was
the martyr spirit; the readiness to surrender ease,
position, and success for an idea. It would have
been strange if, at such a time, a young man, a
clergyman, too, had been a champion of vested interests.
The doctrine of a higher law than that
of the State commended itself to his idealism, and
pledged him to oppose what he regarded as legalized
wrong. The doctrine of legal rights for all men
-----File: 051.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
made him a firm enemy of organized inhumanity.
It was a period of passionate war. In every department
of the Church and State the irrepressible
conflict went on. It was no time for the calm voice
of the loving spirit of wisdom to be heard. It was
no time to propose that the local laws respecting
slavery should be remodelled, and the relation
between whites and blacks readjusted on more equitable
principles. The science of anthropology had no
weight in America or anywhere else. No exhaustive
study of race peculiarities could be entered on. The
combatants had the whole field, and between the
combatants there seemed to be no room for choice
by a minister of the Gospel, an enthusiastic friend of
humanity, a democrat, and a transcendentalist.

On one occasion, after a brutal scene in Boston
attending the return of a slave to his master, feeling
that the larger part of his congregation were in sympathy
with the government, and approved of the act
of surrender, the excited minister declined to give
the ordinance of communion, thinking it would be
a mockery. This action brought the growing disaffection
to a head. The feeling of the parish was
divided. Bitter words were exchanged. The situation
on both sides became uncomfortable, and he
accepted an invitation to another city, where he
could exercise his independence without check or
limit.

The position in regard to slavery which was
taken thirty years ago there is no room to regret.
-----File: 052.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
It was taken with perfect sincerity, and under an
uncontrollable pressure of conviction. The part performed
by the abolitionists was predestined. The
conduct of their opponents looks now as irrational
as it did then. American slavery was so atrocious a
system, so hideous a blot, that no terms were to be
kept with it. Probably nothing but the surgeon's
knife would have availed in dealing with such
a cancerous mass. The cord had become so fatally
twisted that the knot, too closely drawn to be
untied, must be cut with the sword. The abolition
of slavery was inevitable; it came about through a
great elemental upheaval. The situation had become
intolerable and was past reforming. Long
before the war, it had become impossible to get
along with the slaveholders, except on the most
ignoble principles of trade or fashion. All manly
acquiescence was out of the question. The Unitarians,
as such, were indifferent or lukewarm; the
leading classes were opposed to the agitation. Dr.
Channing stood almost alone in lending countenance
to the reform, though his hesitation between the
dictates of natural feeling and Christian charity
towards the masters hampered his action, and rendered
him obnoxious to both parties,--the radicals
finding fault with him for not going further, the
conservatives blaming him because he went so far.
The transcendentalists were quite universally abolitionists,
for their philosophy pointed directly towards
the exaltation of every natural power. Wherever
-----File: 053.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
they touched the earth--as they did not always,
some of them soaring away beyond terrestrial things--flowers
of hope sprang up in their path. In
France, Germany, and England, they were friends
of intellectual and social progress, of the ideal democracy.
The spiritual philosophy was in the air;
its ideas were unconsciously absorbed by the enthusiastic
spirits. They constituted the life of the
period; they were a light to such as dwelt in
darkness or sat under the shadow of death.

In this country Mr. Emerson led the dance of the
hours. He was our poet, our philosopher, our sage,
our priest. He was the eternal man. If we could
not go where he went, it was because we were weak
and unworthy to follow the steps of such an emancipator.
His singular genius, his wonderful serenity
of disposition inherited from an exceptional ancestry
and seldom ruffled by the ordinary passions of men,
his curious felicity of speech, his wit, his practical
wisdom, raised him above all his contemporaries.
His infrequent contact with the world of affairs, his
seclusion in the country, his apparitions from time
to time on lecture platforms or in convention halls,
gave a far-off sound to his voice as if it fell from the
clouds. Some among his friends found fault with
him for being bloodless and ethereal, but this added
to the effect of his presence and his word. The
mixture of Theism and Pantheism in his thoughts,
of the personal and the impersonal, of the mystical
and the practical, fascinated the sentiment of the
-----File: 054.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
generation, while the lofty moral strain of his teaching
awakened to increased energy the wills of men.
His speech and example stimulated every desire for
reform, turning all eyes that were opened to the
land of promise that seemed fully in sight. How
much the anti-slavery conviction of the time, along
with every other movement for the purification of
society, owed to him we have always been fond of
saying with that indefiniteness of specification which
communicates so much more than it tells. This
must be said, that, in the exhilaration of the period,
they that worked hardest felt no exhaustion, and
they that sacrificed most were conscious of no self-abnegation,
and they that threw their lives into this
cause had no sentiment but one of overflowing gratitude
and joy. The anti-slavery agitation was felt to
be something more than an attempt to apply the
Beatitudes and the Parables to a flagrant case of
inhumanity--it was regarded as a new interpreter
of religion, a fresh declaration of the meaning of the
Gospel, a living sign of the purely human character
of a divine faith, an education in brotherly love and
sacrifice; it was a common saying that now, for the
first time in many generations, the essence of belief
was made visible and palpable to all men; that
Providence was teaching us in a most convincing
way, and none but deaf ears could fail to understand
the message.

It was, indeed, a most suggestive and inspiring
time. Never shall I forget, never shall I cease to
-----File: 055.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
be grateful for, the communion with noble minds
that was brought about, the moral earnestness
that was engendered, the moral insight that was
quickened. Then, if ever, we ascended the Mount
of Vision. I was brought into close communion
with living men, the most living of the time, the
most under the influence of stimulating thoughts;
and if they were intemperate in their speech, extravagant
in their opinions, absolute in their moral
judgments, that must be taken as proof of the depth
of their conviction. They loved much, and therefore
could be forgiven, if forgiveness was necessary.
They sacrificed a good deal, too, some of them everything
in the shape of worldly honor, and this brought
them apparently into line with the confessors and
saints. They made real the precepts of the New
Testament. Their clients were the poor, the lowly,
the disfranchised, the unprivileged, against whom
the grandeurs of the world lifted a heavy hand.
They were champions of those who sorrowed and
prayed, and this was enough to win sympathy and
disarm criticism. It was a great experience; not
only was religion brought face to face with ethics,
but it was identified with ethics. It became a religion
of the heart: pity, sympathy, humanity, and
brotherhood were its essential principles. At the
anti-slavery fairs all sorts and conditions of men met
together, without distinction of color or race or sex.
There was really an education in the broadest faith,
in which dogma, creed, form, and rite were second-*
-----File: 056.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
*ary to love; and love was not only universal, but
was warm.

Salem was the home of story and legend. There
Puritanism showed its best and worst sides, for
there Roger Williams preached, and there the
witches were persecuted. The house where they
were tried and the hill where they were executed
were objects of curiosity. There were the wild
pastures and the romantic shores, and broad streets
shaded by elm trees, and gardens and greenhouses.
There were spacious mansions and beautiful country-seats
and pleasant walks. There was beauty and
grace and accomplishment and wit. There were
quaint old buildings, and ways once trodden by
pious and heroic feet. On the whole, this was the
most idyllic period in my ministry. Thither came
Emanuel Vitalis Scherb, the native of Basel, an
exile for opinion's sake, a man full of genius, learning,
enthusiasm. Young, handsome, hopeful, his
lectures on German literature and poetry attracted
notice in Boston, whence he came to Salem to talk
and be entertained. The best houses were open to
him; the best people went to hear him. Alas, poor
Scherb! His day of popularity was short. He
sank from one stage of poverty to another; he was
indebted to friends for aid, among the rest to H.
W. Longfellow, who clung to him till the last, and
finally died from disease in a military hospital early
in our Civil War.

I remember, in connection with Samuel Johnson,
-----File: 057.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
collecting an audience for Mr. A. B. Alcott, the
most adroit soliloquizer I ever listened to, who
delivered in a vestry-room a series of those remarkable
"conversations"--versations with the <i>con</i> left
out--for which he was celebrated. It was, in many
respects, a happy time.
-----File: 058.png---\\Long Green\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------




V.

THE CRISIS IN BELIEF.


I was in Salem when this came. It happened in
the following way: A woman in my choir, a melancholy,
tearful, forlorn woman, asked me one day
if I knew Theodore Parker. I said I did not, but
then, seeing her disappointment, I asked her why
she put that question. She replied that her husband
had abandoned her some months before and
with another woman had gone to Maine. There he
had left the woman and was living in Boston, and
was a member of Mr. Parker's Society; and she
thought that if I knew Mr. Parker I might find out
something about him, and perhaps induce him to
come back to Salem. I told her I was going to
Boston in a day or two, and would see Mr. Parker.

My visit, again and again repeated, resulted in an
intimacy with that extraordinary man which had a
lasting effect on my career. His personal sympathy,
his profound humanity, his quickness of feeling, his
sincerity, his courage, his absolute fidelity of service,
even more than his astonishing vigor of intellect
and his earnestness in pursuit of truth, made a deep
-----File: 059.png---\\Long Green\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
impression on my mind. To be in his society was
to be impelled in the direction of all nobleness. He
talked with me, lent me books, stimulated the thirst
for knowledge, opened new visions of usefulness. As
I recall it now, his influence was mainly personal,
the power that comes from a great character. He
communicated a moral impetus. Faith in man, love
of liberty in thought, institution, law, breathed in all
his words and works. His theological ideas were
somewhat mixed, as was inevitable then. His gift
of spiritual vision, especially as shown in his interpretation
of the Old-Testament narratives, may have
been imperfect; his moral perspective may have
been incomplete; his learning was copious, rather
than discerning. But his single-mindedness was
perfect, and his devotion to his fellow-men was
almost superhuman. It was a privilege to know
such a man, so simple-hearted and brave. The
slight disposition to put himself on his omniscience,
to strike an attitude, was not strange considering his
enormous force, his consciousness of power, his
singular influence over men, and his conviction (in
large measure forced on him by his advocates) that
he was a religious reformer, a second Luther, the
inaugurator of a new Protestantism. His three
doctrines, to which he constantly appealed, and in
proof of which he adduced the testimony of the
human soul,--the existence of a personal God, the
immortality of the individual, and the absoluteness
of the "moral law" might have been untenable
-----File: 060.png---\\Long Green\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
in the presence of modern knowledge under the
form in which he stated them. His vast collection
of materials in attestation of Theism may have been
valuable chiefly as a curiosity; but the man himself
was all of one piece, genuine through and through.
The mingling of fire and moderation in him was
very remarkable, the blending of consuming radicalism
with saving conservatism puzzled his more
vehement disciples; but his character interested
everybody; his firmness was visible from afar, and
his warmth of heart was felt through stone walls.
There were no two ministers in Boston who did as
much for the inmates of hospitals and prisons as he
did. His ministry ceased a quarter of a century ago,
but the effect is vital yet, and will last for years to
come. At this distance the heart leaps up to meet
him. His chief work was done, for it consisted mainly
in the adoption of a type of character, and length
of days is not needed for this, while it is apt to be
impaired by the infirmities of age. His long, wearisome
illness, full of weakness and pain, tested the
strength of his fortitude, patience, hopefulness, and
trust, and was interesting as showing the passive,
acquiescent side of heroism, all the more impressive
in view of his love of life, his desire to finish his
course, his sense of accountability (stronger in him
than in anybody I ever met), and his wish to serve
his kind. It was my happiness, more than ten years
after he went away from men, to dwell for months
in his atmosphere, while writing his biography, and
-----File: 061.png---\\Long Green\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
all my old impressions of him were confirmed. And
five years later, reviewing his life in the <i>Index</i>,
I was again struck by his greatness. I may be
excused for quoting the closing passage from the
<i>Index</i>, of July 5, 1877, in which I stated the claims
of Theodore Parker to the honor of posterity. The
paragraph sums up the qualities that have been
ascribed to him--integrity, catholicity, outspokenness;
to these might have been added warmth
of heart, but this last attribute lay on the surface,
and could be easily appreciated by ordinary observers--in
fact, was seen and acknowledged by his
enemies, and by those who knew him least.

/#
On the whole, then, I should say that <i>manliness</i> was Theodore
Parker's crowning quality and supreme claim to distinction.
That he had other most remarkable gifts is conceded as a
matter of course. Everybody knows that he had. But this
was his prime characteristic. The other gifts he had in spite
of himself--his thirst for knowledge, his love of books, his all-devouring
industry, his unfailing memory, his natural eloquence
or power of affluent expression; but character men regard as
less a gift than an acquisition,--the fruit of aspiration, resolve,
fidelity,--the product of daily, nay, of hourly, endeavor.
Hence it is that intellectual greatness does not impress the
multitude; even genius has but a limited sway over the
masses of mankind. But character goes to the roots of life.
In fact, Theodore Parker's eminence as a man of thought and
expression in words has concealed from the world at large the
intrinsic quality of the person. His reputation as theologian,
preacher, controversialist, has concealed the real greatness
which comes to light as the dust of controversy subsides.
The very causes in which the heroism of his manliness was
#/
-----File: 062.png---\\Long Green\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
/#
displayed--as, for example, the anti-slavery cause, to which
he devoted so much of his time and vitality--rendered inconspicuous
the contribution he made to the treasury of humane
feeling. Now that that great conflict is over, now that its
agitations have ceased and its heats have cooled, the character
of which this conflict revealed but a portion, the career in
which this long agony was but an episode, loom up into
distinctness. The greatest of all human achievements is a
manly character--guileless, sincere, and brave; that he by all
admission possessed. He earned it; he prayed for it; meditated
for it; worked for it;--how hard, his private journals
show. And for this he will not be forgotten. For this he
will be remembered as one of the benefactors, one of the
emancipators, of his kind.
#/

From a shelf in his library, I took Schwegler's
"Nachapostolische Zeitalter," a work which threw a
flood of light on the problems of New-Testament
criticism. This led to a study of the writings of
F.C. Baur, the founder of the so-called "Tbingen
School." A complete set of the <i>Theologische
Jahrbcher</i>, the organ of his ideas, was imported
from Germany, and carefully perused. These volumes
contained full and minute studies on all the
books of the New Testament--Gospels, Epistles, the
writing termed "The Acts of the Apostles," with incidental
glances at the "Apocalypse." The calm,
consistent strength of these expositions commended
them to my mind. The author was a university
professor, a man of practical piety, a Lutheran
preacher of high repute, simple, affectionate, faithful
to his duties, quite unconscious that he was undermining
anybody's faith, so deeply rooted was the
-----File: 063.png---\\lklittle\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
old Lutheran freedom of criticism in regard to the
Bible. In the German mind, religion and literature,
Christianity and the Scriptures, were entirely distinct
things. The scholar could sit in his library in
one mood and could enter his pulpit in another,
preserving in both the single-mindedness that became
a Christian and a student.

Other theories have arisen since, but none that
have taken hold of such eminent minds have appeared.
Theodore Parker accepted it; James Martineau
adopted its main proposition in several remarkable
papers written at various times, last in the Unitarian
magazine <i>Old and New</i>. In the brilliant lectures
delivered in London, during the spring of 1880, on
the Hibbert Foundation, Ernest Renan's striking
account of early Christianity owed its force to the
assumption of the fundamental postulate of the
Tbingen School. In the latter years of his life,
Baur summed up the results of his criticism in a
pamphlet that was designed to meet objections; and
in 1875-1877 his son-in-law, the learned Edward
Zeller, one of his ablest disciples, an eminent professor
of history at Berlin, published an earnest,
carefully considered, masterly report of the writings
of the now famous teacher, in the course of which
he paid a merited tribute to his character, vindicated
his views from the charge of haste and partisanship,
and predicted for them a triumphant future.[1]

The adoption of these opinions, so opposed to the

[Footnote 1: "Vortrge und Abhandlungen," von E. Zeller, 2 vols., Leipzig.]
-----File: 064.png---\\lklittle\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
views current in the community, compelled the
adoption of a new basis for religious conviction.
Christianity, in so far as it depended on the New
Testament or the doctrines of the early Church, was
discarded. The cardinal tenets of the Creed--the
Deity of the Christ, the atonement, everlasting perdition--had
been dismissed already, and I was virtually
beyond the limits of the Confession. But
Theism remained, and the spiritual nature of man
with its craving for religious truth. Without going
so far as Theodore Parker did, who maintained that
the three primary beliefs of religion--the existence
of God, the assurance of individual immortality, the
reality of a moral law--were permanent, universal,
and definite facts of human nature, found wherever
man was found; without going so far as this, I
contended that man had a spiritual nature; that
this nature, on coming to consciousness of its powers
and needs, gave expression to exalted beliefs, clothing
them with authority, building them into temples,
ordaining them in the form of ceremonies and priesthoods.
In support of this opinion, appeal was made
to the great religions of the world, to the substantial
agreement of all sacred books, to the spontaneous
homage paid, in all ages, to saints and prophets; to
the essential accord of moral precepts all over the
globe, to the example of Jesus, to the Beatitudes
and Parables, to the respect given by rude people
to the noblest persons, to the credences that inspire
multitudes, to the teachings of Schleiermacher,
-----File: 065.png---\\lklittle\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
Fichte, Constant, Cousin, Carlyle, Goethe, Emerson,
in fact, to every leading writer of the last generation.
All this was so beautiful, so consistent and convincing,
so full of promise, so broad, plain, and inspiring
that, with a fresh but miscalculated enthusiasm,
over-sanguine, thoughtless, the young minister undertook
to carry his congregation with him, but
without success; so he went elsewhere. This action
proceeded from the faith that Parker instilled.
Parker was pre-eminently, to those who comprehended
him, a believer.

In the words of D. A. Wasson, his successor in
Music Hall:

/#
Theodore Parker was one of the most energetic and religious
believers these later centuries have known. This was the
prime characteristic of the man. He did not agree in the
details of his unbelieving with the majority of those around
him, because it was part of his religion to think freely, part of
their religion to forbear thinking freely on the highest matters.
But he was not only a powerful believer in his own soul, but
was the believing Hercules who went forth in the name of
divine law to cleanse the Augean stables of the world ...
This, I repeat, and can not repeat with too much emphasis,
was the characteristic of the man--sinewy, stalwart, prophetic,
fervid, aggressive, believing ... The Hercules rather
than the Apollo of belief, it was not his to charm rocks and
trees with immortal music, but to smite the hydra of publicity,
iniquity, and consecrated falsehood with the club or mace of
belief; if this might not suffice, then to burn out its foul life
with the fire of his sarcasms.
#/
-----File: 066.png---\\lklittle\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------

To quote my own words, written in 1873[A]:

/#
With him the religious sentiment was supreme. It had no
roots in his being wholly distinct from its mental or sensible
forms of expression. Never evaporating in mystical dreams
nor entangled in the meshes of cunning speculation, it preserved
its freshness and bloom and fragance [** fragrance] in every passage
of his life. His sense of the reality of divine things was as
strong as was ever felt by a man of such clear intelligence.
His feeling never lost its glow, never was damped by misgiving,
dimmed by doubt, or clouded by sorrow. Far from
dreading to submit his faith to test, he courted tests; was as
eager to hear the arguments against his belief as for it; was
as fair in weighing evidence on the opponent's side as on his
own. "Oh, that mine enemy had written a book!" he was
ready to cry, not that he might demolish it, but that he might
read it. He knew the writings of Moleschott, and talked
with him personally; the books of Carl Vogt were not strange
to him. The philosophy of Ludwig Bchner, if philosophy it
can be called, was as familiar to him as to any of Bchner's
disciples. He was intimate with the thoughts of Feuerbach.
He drew into discussion every atheist and materialist he met,
talked with them closely and confidentially, and rose from the
interview more confident in the strength of his own positions
than ever. Science he counted his best friend; relied on it
for confirmation of his faith, and was only impatient because
it moved no faster. All the materialists in and out of Christendom
had no power to shake his conviction of the Infinite
God and the immortal existence, nor would have had had he
lived till he was a century old, for, in his view, the convictions
were planted deep in human nature, and were demanded by
the exigencies of human life. Moleschott respected Parker;
Dessor was his confidential friend; Feuerbach would have
taken him by the hand as a brother.
#/

[Footnote A: see "Life." p. 566]

There can be no greater mistake than to call
Theodore Parker a Deist; than to class Theodore
Parker with the Deists. He was utterly unlike
-----File: 067.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
Chubb or Shaftesbury, Herbert of Cherbury or
Bolingbroke. Even the most philosophical of them
had nothing in common with him. Hume and Voltaire,
for instance, were utterly unlike him. They,
it is true, believed in <i>a</i> God, the "First Cause," the
"Author of Nature," the "Supreme Being," and in
a future life. But their belief was merely logical
and mechanical, his was vital; he believed in the
real, living, immanent Deity. They thought that
religion was an imposition, a policy of the priests,
who played upon the fears of mankind; he believed
that religion was a working power in the world, the
origin of the highest achievement, the soul of all
aspiration. They had no faith in the direct communication
of the "Supreme Mind" with the soul
of man; he believed in the infinite genius of man,
and in the direct communication of the absolute
intelligence. They thought of justice as a contrivance
for securing happiness; he thought of it as
the law of life. One of Mr. Parker's friends ascribed
to him a gorgeous imagination; if he had it,
it is a surprise that it should have been so completely
suppressed as it was, for his taste in pictures
and in poetry was very questionable. His want of
speculative talent probably helped him with the
people. Whether he formulated his thoughts is uncertain.
Such was not his genius. He was a constructive,
not a destructive. It was his faith that he
criticised the Bible in order that he might release
its piety and righteousness; that he tore in pieces
-----File: 068.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
the creeds in order to emancipate the secrets of
divinity.

It is useless to conjecture what Parker might
have been had he lived. That he would have held
to his primary convictions is almost certain; [**word missing?] is
quite certain that he would have loved mental liberty.
He would have been a great power in our Civil War;
he would probably have been a leader in the free religious
movement. Parker, when I first knew him,
was in full life and vigor. He had gone to Boston a
short time before my ordination in 1847, and had before
him a long future of usefulness. All the exigencies
in which he might have been conspicuous were
distant. That the effect of such a man on me and my
connections was exceedingly great is not strange. It
would have been strange had it been otherwise. In
sermon, prayer, private conversations my convictions
came out. That the people were disappointed may
be assumed, but they were kind, generous, and patient.
The congregations did not fall off; there
was little violence or even vehement expostulation.
But the position was not comfortable, and when an
invitation came from Jersey City to found a new
Society, I accepted it at once. It had been a dream
of Dr. Bellows to establish a Society at that place,
and, learning that I was in search of another sphere
of activity, he asked me to undertake the work.
This was seconded by a cordial representation from
Jersey City itself, on the part of some who were
Dr. Bellows' own parishioners. The uprooting was
-----File: 069.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
not easy, for Salem had become endeared to me as
the first scene of my ministry, a place where I could
be useful in many ways, and which contained a delightful
society; an established, well-furnished town,
with historic associations; a country centre, an
agreeable situation. But the waters were getting
still there, and the sentiment of the past was getting
to over-weigh the promises of the future.
-----File: 070.png---\\andrewpmk\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------




VI.

JERSEY CITY.


Jersey City, to which I went directly from Salem,
was a very different place from what it is now;
smaller and perhaps pleasanter. Where now is a
large city, a few years ago was but a village. Now
it is a manufacturing place, with great establishments,
foundries, machine-shops, banks, insurance
companies, newspapers, more than forty schools, and
more than sixty churches. Then it was a large
town, though it was nominally a city (incorporated
in 1820), with a population of about twenty thousand,
the increase being chiefly due to the annexation
of suburbs, not to its own vital growth. It
was substantially rural in character, with extensive
meadows, broad avenues; a place of residence
largely, the gentlemen living there and doing business
in New York. There were a few Unitarians,
a few Universalists, but there was no organized
Unitarian society before I went there. A great
many cultivated people resided in this place. There
was wealth, culture, and interest in social matters.
A meeting-house was built for me and dedicated to
a large, rational faith.
-----File: 071.png---\\andrewpmk\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------

The chief peculiarity of my ministry there was
the disuse of the communion service. This rite I
had thought a great deal about in Salem. There
had been, then, a well-meant proposal on the part
of the pastor to make an alteration in the form
of administering the communion service. The custom
had been (quite an incidental one, for the usage
was by no means the same in all the churches of the
denomination) to thrust the rite in once a month,
between the morning worship and dinner time, and
to offer it then to none but the church-members,
who composed but a small part of the congregation.
As a consequence of this arrangement, the observance
became formal, dry, short, and tiresome. To the
majority of the Society it seemed a mystical ceremony
with which they had no concern, while those
who stayed to take part in it, wearied already by the
preceding exercises, and hungry for their mid-day
meal, gave to it but half-hearted attention. The
observance was thus worse than thrown away; for,
in addition to the loss of an opportunity for spiritual
impression, a dangerous kind of self-righteousness
was encouraged in the few church-members, who
regarded themselves as in some way set apart from
their fellow-sinners, either as having made confession
of faith or as being subjects of a peculiar
experience. To impart freshness to the rite, and at
the same time to extend its usefulness as a "means
of grace," the minister proposed to celebrate it less
frequently (once in two or three months), to substi-*
-----File: 072.png---\\andrewpmk\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------
*tute it in place of the usual afternoon meeting, to
make special preparation for it by the co-operation
of the choir, and to throw it open to as many as
might choose to come, be they church members
or not. The suggestion met with feeble response,
and that chiefly from young people who had hitherto
stayed away out of a laudable feeling of modesty,
not wishing to remain when their elders and betters
went out, and not thinking themselves good enough
to partake of a special privilege. The "communicants,"
as a rule, set their faces against the innovation,
perhaps because they were secretly persuaded
that the change portended the secularizing of Christianity
by a removal of the barrier that divided the
church from the world, possibly because they wished
to retain an exclusive prerogative which had always
marked the "elect."

The matter was not pressed; the routine went on
as before; the minister did his best to render the
service impressive and interesting. But his studies
and meditations led him to the conclusion that the
observance had no place in the Unitarian system;
that it was a mere formality, without an excuse for
being; that it contained no idea or sentiment that
was not expressed in the ordinary worship; that it
was a remnant of an otherwise discarded form of
Christianity, where it had a peculiar significance;
that it was the last attenuation of the Roman sacrament
of transubstantiation; that it ought to be
dropped from every scheme of liberal faith as an
-----File: 073.png---\\andrewpmk\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------
illogical adjunct, a harmful excrescence, a hindrance,
in short. No whisper of these doubts was breathed
at the time, but the pastor's silence allowed the
scepticism to strike the deeper root in his mind.
Mr. Emerson's departure from his parish, on the
ground that he could no longer administer the communion
rite according to the usage of the sect, had
occurred many years before this, but was still
remembered in discussion and talk. Theodore Parker
had no communion; but he was an established
leader of heresy, and did not furnish an example.
Many, agreeing with Emerson's reasoning, disapproved
of his course in resigning his pulpit rather
than continue to administer the bread and wine.
He himself advised others to hold on to the observance,
if they could, hoping for the time when it
might be universally vivified by faith. Some might
do it as it was. The congregations would, it is
likely, without exception, have decided as his did,
to lose their minister sooner than their "Supper."
Some years later, on passing through Boston on my
way to another scene of labor, I called on a distinguished
clergyman who had taken a part in my
ordination, and was asked by him what I intended
to do in my new parish with regard to the communion.
I replied that it was not my purpose to
have it, "You cannot give it up," he said; "it
is stronger than any of us. I should drop it if
I dared, for there is nothing real in it that is not
in the general service, but I am afraid to try. I
-----File: 074.png---\\andrewpmk\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------
shall watch your experiment with interest, but without
expectation of its success." "Very well," I replied,
"we shall see." The experiment was tried
and succeeded. For four years I had no communion,
and not a word was said about it. On leaving for
New York, several of my friends, who had been
accustomed to the ceremony all their lives, were
asked if they did not think it would be wise to reinstate
the rite. To my surprise, they with one voice
said that there was no need of it, that the Society got
along perfectly well without it. It is needless to say
that in New York the observance was never celebrated.

The ceremony was justified among Unitarians by
various reasons which, in the end, seemed apologies.
With the old-fashioned, semi-orthodox members of
the congregations it was a precious heirloom, prized
for its antiquity; a link that still held them in the
bond of fellowship with the universal church; a last
relic of the supernaturalism to which they clung
without knowing why; the pledge of a mystical
union with their Christ. Any change in the administration
of it was regarded as a desecration; the
suggestion of its complete discontinuance could,
they thought, arise in no mind that was not fatally
poisoned by infidelity. It was not, in their opinion,
a symbol of doctrine, but a channel of divine influence,
which no intellectual doubts could touch,
which spiritual deadness alone could dispense with.
Tenets might be abandoned, forms of belief might
be discredited, but this citadel of faith must not be
-----File: 075.png---\\andrewpmk\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------
assailed or approached by irreverent feet. Mr. Emerson's
example was not followed by his contemporaries.
His fellows did not so soon reach his
point of conviction. Even radicals, like George Ripley,
did not. In my own case it was the growth of
time. At the moment there was no disposition to
abandon the observance, simply a desire to reanimate
it. It was not perceived till much later that
the changes proposed implied a virtual abandonment
of the rite itself; that the communion is regarded as
a sacrament, that as a sacrament it might be presumed
to be supernaturally instituted for the communication
of the divine life; that, when faith in
the supernatural declines, the sacrament no longer
has a function as a medium, and must be omitted;
that no attempts to revive it as a sentimental practice
could be justified to reason; that all endeavors
to awaken interest in it by assuming some occult
efficacy must be futile because groundless. The
"memorial service" can in no proper sense be called
a sacrament. It may be a pleasing expression of
sentiment, somewhat over-strained and fanciful, but
capable of being made attractive. The task of reproducing
the emotions of the early disciples as they
sat at supper with their Master, nearly two thousand
years ago, is too severe for the ordinary imagination,
and when persisted in from a sense of duty may become
a dull, creaking performance, against which the
sensitive rebel and the witty are tempted to launch
the shafts of their sarcasm. The only way of saving
-----File: 076.png---\\andrewpmk\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------
it from gibes is to ascribe to it some mystical efficacy
for which there is no logical excuse. The Roman
Catholic doctrine of Transubstantiation had a
foundation in the philosophy of the Church. The
Lutheran doctrine of Consubstantiation, which recognized
the presence of Christ on the occasion, but
not the literal change of the substance of his flesh,
was legitimate. But the Sabellian theory, which
the Unitarians inherited, was in no respect justified,
save as a tradition.

The sole alternative at that time for me, when the
Communion service was made a test question between
the "conservative" and the "radical," was to
drop it. At present the situation is altered. It is
no longer a ceremony or a tradition, but a means of
spiritual cultivation. It stands for fellowship and
aspiration, not for a communion of saints, but of all
those who desire to share the saintly mind, of all
who aim at perfection. The rite is one in which all
may unite who wish, however fitfully, for goodness;
<i>all</i>, whether Romanist or Protestant, and Protestant
of whatever name; <i>all,</i>, in every religion under the
sun, Eastern or Western, Northern or Southern, old
or new, every dividing line being erased. I once
attended the Communion service of a Broad Churchman.
The invitation was large and inclusive, comprehending
everybody who, though far off, looked
towards the light, everybody who had the least
glimmer of the divine radiance; and none but an
absolute infidel was shut out. There was a recognition
of a divine nature in men,--
-----File: 077.png---\\andrewpmk\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------

/*
Like plants in mines which never saw the sun,
But dream of him, and guess where he may be,
And do their best to climb and get to him.
*/

The idea of spiritual communion is a grand one.
It is universal too; it is human in the best sense.
The symbols were ancient when Jesus used them,
the Bread signifying Truth, the Wine signifying Life.
Originally the symbols referred to the wealth of
nature, as is evident from an ancient prayer. It
was the custom for the master of the Jewish feast to
repeat this form of words: "Blessed be Thou, O
Lord, our God, who givest us the fruits of the
vine," and then he gave the cup to all.

Leaving out the personal application which is
purely incidental, and discarding the sacramental
idea which is a corruption, throwing the service
open to the whole congregation as an opportunity, a
great deal may be accomplished in the way of spiritual
advancement. True, the ceremony contains no
thought or sentiment that is not expressed in the
sermon or the prayer, but it puts these in poetic
form, it addresses them directly to the imagination,
it associates them with the holier souls in their
holiest hours, and brings people face to face with
their better selves in the tenderest and most touching
manner, teaching charity, love, endeavor after
the religious life. The rite is full of beauty when
confined within the bounds of Christianity, but when
extended to the principles of other faiths, it is rich
in meaning, and may be used with effect by those
-----File: 078.png---\\andrewpmk\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------
who wish to educate the people in the highest form
of idealism, who desire comprehensiveness. A symbol
often goes further than an argument, and a symbol
so ancient and so consecrated ought to be preserved.
A friend of mine included all religious
teachers in his commemoration. This was a step in
the right direction, but if the people are not ready
for this yet, they may welcome an extension of the
reign of spiritual love among the disciples whom
theological hatred has kept apart. But this was
not suspected then.

It will be remarked that my reasons were not
those of Emerson. His argument was solid and
sound, but his real reason was personal. He said in
his sermon: "If I believed it was enjoined by Jesus
and his disciples that he even contemplated making
permanent this mode of commemoration, every way
agreeable to an Eastern mind, and yet on trial it
was disagreeable to my own feelings, I should not
adopt it ... It is my desire in the office of a
Christian minister to do nothing which I cannot do
with my whole heart. Having said this I have said
all ... That is the end of my opposition, that I am
not interested in it." My ground was different; I
had no objection to the symbol, none to an Oriental
symbol, and the mere fact that I was not interested
in it seemed to me not pertinent to the case. My
objection was that it divided those who ought to be
united; that it encouraged a form of self-righteousness;
that it implied a "grace" that did not exist.
-----File: 079.png---\\andrewpmk\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------
For the rest, my form of religion was of sentiment.
It was scarcely Unitarian, not even Christian in a
technical sense or in any other but a broad moral
signification. It was Theism founded on the Transcendental
philosophy, a substitute for the authority
of Romanism and of Protestantism. This was an admirable
counterfeit of Inspiration[C], having the fire,
the glow, the beauty of it. It most successfully tided
over the gulf between Protestantism and Rationalism.
Parker used it with great effect. It was the
life of Emerson's teaching. It animated Thomas
Carlyle. It was the fundamental assumption of the
Abolitionists, and of all social reformers.

[Footnote C: Breathing in and breathing out, or being spirit-filled.]

I had perfect freedom of speech in Jersey City;
there was no opposition to the doctrine announced.
The Society there was large and flourishing, and its
influence in the town was on the increase. But Jersey
City was, after all, a suburb only of New York.
Some of my most devoted hearers came from New
York, and urged me to go there. Dr. Bellows was
anxious to found a third Society in the great city, and
added his word to their solicitations, so that in the
spring of 1859 I went thither. My church in Jersey
City was continued for a short time, but I had
no settled successor; the congregation did not grow;
some of my most earnest supporters had either died
or left the town. The war broke out and was fatal
to institutions that had not a deep root. The building
was sold soon after, for business purposes I think,
and the society was never renewed. This may ap-*
-----File: 080.png---\\andrewpmk\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------
*pear singular considering that there are Unitarian
churches elsewhere in New Jersey, at Camden,
Orange, Plainfield, Vineland, and Woodbury. The
changed condition of the town may have had something
to do with the failure to revive, after the war,
the Unitarian Society. The Catholic, Presbyterian,
Orthodox Congregationalist communions were more
suited to the new population than the Unitarian was.
Possibly, too, the "radical" complexion of the parish
had something to do with the disrepute that fell
upon it. However this may have been, the cause
did not seem to prosper. Mr. Job Male, who died
recently at Plainfield, was one of my most zealous
supporters and exerted himself to keep the enterprise
alive, but in vain. It is understood that the flourishing
Unitarian church in Plainfield was largely due
to his efforts.
-----File: 081.png---\\andrewpmk\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------




VII.

NEW YORK.


For the first year in New York I lived with Dr.
Bellows at his parsonage. Mrs. Bellows and the
children were at Eagleswood, New Jersey, the children
being at school with Mr. Weld. And this is
the place to say something about Henry Whitney
Bellows. He was a very remarkable man, most extraordinary
in his way; an original man, a peculiar
individual; of mercurial temper, various, quick,
sympathetic, brave, whole-hearted, generous, but all
in his own fashion. More Celtic than Saxon, more
French than English, prone to generalize, something
of a <i>doctrinaire</i>, indifferent to personalities,
but of warm affections where he was interested;
loyal, as knights always are, where his honor was
concerned, but impatient of dictation, restless, nervous,
impetuous, dashing from side to side, always
consistent with himself, yet rarely consistent with
ordinary rules of conventional society. Such a man
is best described in detail.

Dr. Bellows, as we called him, had a singular gift
of <i>expression</i>. This was the soul of him, his most
-----File: 082.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
prominent feature, the trait that explains every other.
His appearance indicated as much. He had a
mobile mouth, flexible features, a ringing voice, a
cordial manner. He was fond of talking, brilliant in
conversation, attractive in social intercourse, a charming
companion, full of wit, rapid in repartee, ready
with anecdote, illustration, allusion. He was a
great favorite at the dinner-table, at friendly gatherings,
at the club, where a circle always collected
round him and were delighted with the endless
versatility of his discourse. In fact, he was a man
of society rather than a clergyman, though he occupied
a pulpit from the beginning, and was faithful to
all the duties of his profession. Still they were not
altogether to his taste, and he got away from them
whenever he conscientiously could. His best deliverances
were half-secular addresses on some theme of
immediate popular interest, speeches, orations, ethical
talks, ever on a high plane of sentiment, but
looking towards the urgent preoccupations of the
time. He was not a student in any direction; not a
deep, patient, exhaustive thinker; not a scholar in
any school, but an immense reader of current literature,
of magazines, papers, memoirs, and an eloquent
reproducer of thoughts as he found them
lying on the surface of the intellectual world. His
brain was exceedingly active, and reached forth in
all directions; his pen was fluent, facile, and busy;
language exuded from all his pores. As a preacher
he was conventional, restrained, and, it must be con-*
-----File: 083.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
*fessed, not engaging as a rule, but as a talker he was
delightful, copious, entertaining, kindling, attractive
to old and young, and crowds thronged the house
when he spoke about what he had seen or felt, while
his pulpit discourses did not fill the pews. Like
many men of remarkable talents, he imagined his
strong points to be those in which he was most
deficient, not being gifted with much power of self-knowledge,
and perhaps aspiring after accomplishments
he did not possess. He prided himself more
than he should have done on his insight as a theologian,
his depth as a philosopher, his skill as an
administrator, his practical success as an organizer;
whereas his consummate ability consisted in exposition,
not in original discovery. He was not a
theologian, not a philosopher, not a builder, but a
most persuasive advocate, perhaps the most adroit I
ever met with. His range was wide, his exuberance
infinite, his sway over his listeners absolute. It is
no marvel that such a man was persuaded that he
could achieve all things.

He was the only speaker I ever knew who could
talk himself into ideas. Many, by dint of talking,
can work themselves into an implicit faith in doctrines
they were indifferent about at starting; but
this man had the dangerous gift of being able, not
merely to think on his feet, but to set his faculties
in motion by the action of his tongue. Again and
again he has gone to a public meeting, at which he
was expected to speak, with no preparation at all, or
-----File: 084.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
none but a very general one, depending upon some
impulse of the moment to set him a-going. A word
dropped by a previous speaker, the mere presence of
the audience, a suggestion awakened in his mind as
he sat awaiting his turn, would excite him sufficiently;
and when he stood up one idea started another, an
illustration opened a new field of thought, till the
torrent, growing deeper and more tumultuous as it
flowed, carried the hearers away in ecstasy. One
who did not know him found it hard to believe that
he had not meditated his address beforehand. He
has gone into the pulpit with a written sermon, and
being struck by a sentence in the Scripture he
was reading, has laid his manuscript aside and
delivered an extemporaneous discourse on an entirely
different theme.

The reason why he did not preach habitually
without notes was that this fatal facility of speech
excited him too much, carried him too far, rendered
him discursive, led him on to inordinate length, and
wearied his congregation. He needed the restraint
of the paper, the calm dignity of the closet meditation;
he needed also to spread his thoughts over a
larger expanse of time, and thus to secure quiet for
his brain. At the risk, therefore, of being dull, he
spared himself, as well as his parishioners, the stimulating
fervor of the extemporaneous address. He
may have felt, too, that his was not the quality of
mind for this method. It required a less fluent
talent, a less ready loquacity, a less mercurial tem-*
-----File: 085.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
*perament, a more reserved habit. There are those
whose constitutional reticence preserves them from
aberration; who can see the end from the beginning;
can cling closely to the matter in hand; can walk a
thin plank; and have too few ready ideas to be in
any peril of going astray. Such are the most successful
extemporaneous preachers. Dr. Bellows'
genius was better adapted to an address, therefore,
than to a sermon.

The secular view of things was more attractive to
him than the spiritual. His defence of the drama in
1857 (an oration delivered in the Academy of Music,
and which was very bold for that time); his vigorous
conduct of the <i>Christian Inquirer</i>, a Unitarian
paper, which he managed and for which he wrote
constantly for four years, advocating an unwonted
liberality of sympathy, maintaining, for example,
the substantial identity of the Unitarian and the
Universalist confessions; his interest in questions of
social and philanthropic concern; his lectures before
the Lowell Institute in 1857,--all attest his desire to
effect a reconciliation between science and religion,
between this world and the next. His oration before
the Phi Beta Kappa Society of Harvard, in
1853, is an admirable specimen of his treatment
of similar themes. The subject of the oration was
"The Ledger and the Lexicon, or Business and
Literature in Account with American Education";
and its purpose was to assert the claims of popular
life against those of scholarship,--to state the case
-----File: 086.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
of natural instincts and practical intelligence as the
controlling force of our destiny. He says, most
truly, at the outset, "Speaking purely as a scholar,
I should unaffectedly feel that I had nothing to
offer worthy this audience or occasion," and then he
goes on with a full, earnest, eloquent plea for the
intellectual character of our political and commercial
activity. Here is an extract:

/#
What History asks from us is not Literature and Art.
The world is full of what can never grow old in either.
<i>American</i> Literature, <i>American</i> Art! Heaven save us from
them! Let us freely use what is so much better than anything
one nation can make, the Literature and Art of the
whole past and the whole world. History implores us, first of
all, to be true to humanity. She begs to see the education,
the taste, the sensibility of this great people turned to the
serious, vital, universal interest of thoroughly vindicating
<i>Man from the scorn of <i>men;</i> of establishing man on his
throne as man,--free because man, happy because man, noble
and religious because man! Literature and Art will take care
of themselves; high education and scholarship will come in
their own time; and so, thank God, will everything humanity
needs. But for ourselves and the immediate generation, there
is no work so worthy as confirming the faith of our people in
their own principles; encouraging devotion to Liberty as the
supreme interest of Man;--of man sacred in his own eyes,
with duties, rights, aims, that are bounded neither by color,
nationality, nor law. The love of the race, the liberation of
humanity from complexional, material, political, and moral
disfranchisements; the elevation of the individual and of
every individual; the prostration of all partition-walls that
separate our kind; the tumbling of the artificial pedestals
that elevate the few, into the unnatural pits that bury the
#/
-----File: 087.png---\\fmmarshall\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
/#
rest; the affiliation of the foreigner, and the emancipation of
the slave; the subjugation of rebellious matter and reluctant
wealth to the wants and desires of man; the establishment of
beautiful and independent homes, of high and free and noble
lives;--this is American scholarship, this American art. A
country that sacrifices even its nationality, that proudest of
all prejudices, to its humanity, will be the first to pay that
tribute to man, which Christ waits to welcome as the final
triumph of his kingdom. And, finally, here in America,
where for the first time universal comfort and general abundance
reign, the race looks to us to pronounce the banns
between the spiritual and material interests and pursuits of
man,--his worldly well-being, and his heavenly prosperity,--a
union that shall not be a miserable compromise of which both
shall be ashamed and which neither shall keep, but an honorable,
hearty, and intelligible alliance, on the highest grounds.
#/

This is very fine and brave, and similar in tone was
all he said about American life and destiny. He
tried to exalt common things, and in this way he
more than made amends for his lack of scholastic
equipment. His mission was to encourage and fortify
and console actual men and women, not to solve
deep problems of fate. A good but commonplace
man spoke to me with tears in his eyes of his endless
gratitude to Dr. Bellows because on one New Year's
Day he preached a doctrine of promise, and said that
men did their best, and that the world was as good
as could be expected; not an extraordinary doctrine
certainly, but one that is seldom announced with so
much cordial, human sympathy. This same ardor he
threw into his ordinary lectures, carrying audiences
away with a flood of conviction.
-----File: 088.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------

When our Civil War broke out and it became
evident, as it soon did, that the conflict would be
a long one, necessitating large armies in a region of
country unused to military needs and ignorant of
military exigencies, Dr. Bellows' attention was drawn
to the questions involved in the maintenance of a
vast number of men in the field, their protection,
discipline, and comfort; the proper supply of food,
clothing, medicine; the best kind of tent, the best
kind of hospital, the duty of keeping up the home
associations by means of correspondence and missives.
He talked over the situation with a few
friends; societies were formed, organizations instituted,
the means of relief set in motion. Out of this
grew the Sanitary Commission, of which he was the
mouthpiece and the inspiring soul. The work was
immense, but the task of awakening the country to
the necessity of endeavor was, beyond all ordinary
power of conception, arduous. Such was the blind
faith in the government,--a government inexperienced
in similar matters,--such was the indifference
of multitudes who were far removed from actual
danger, such the unconsciousness of the magnitude
of the peril, such the insensibility to the demands of
the hour, the serene confidence that all was going
well, the jaunty sense of complacency in having
raised the regiments, that nothing less than a trumpet
call was required to rouse the country to a feeling
of obligation. Afterwards when the magnitude
of the strife was self-evident, when the dangers of
-----File: 089.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
camp-life were understood, and the temptations to
infidelity of many kinds were painfully apparent,
other forces came in to carry forward the work; but
at first prescience was needed, and zeal, and faith in
principles, and a sense of the gravity of the situation.
It is hardly too much to say that but for the
energy shown by the Sanitary Commission in the
early part of the war, the issue might have been indefinitely
postponed. That the Commission itself
flourished to the end was due in the main to Henry
Bellows. Of course he did not do everything, but
he did his part. The labor of organization was discharged
by other orders of genius. The duties of
treasurer devolved upon men differently constituted
still; there were many hands employed, many heads
busy with planning. But his was the potent voice.
He sounded the clarion; East, West, North, and as
far South as he could go, he argued, remonstrated,
pleaded, exhorted, interpreted, inspired, and wherever
he was heard he filled veins with patriotic fire.
He was never daunted, never disheartened, never
depressed. His tones always rang out clear, strong,
decisive. The bugle never gave an uncertain sound.
In Washington he addressed the highest authorities
and was so urgent, not to say so imperious, that
President Lincoln asked him which of the two
ran the machine of government. He possessed in
a singular degree the power of making people work,
and work gladly,--all sorts of people, men and
women, the sensible and the enthusiastic, the prac-*
-----File: 090.png---\\Beatrice\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
*tical and the sentimental, the low-toned and the
high-strung; and they toiled day after day at scraping
lint, packing garments, raising money, organizing
fairs. In the meantime he travelled to and fro, lecturing,
addressing crowds in the meeting-houses,
halls, theatres; writing letters to committees, visiting
men of influence, inspecting hospitals and camps,
making himself acquainted with the newest methods
of dealing with sanitary problems, and imparting
ideas as fast as they came to him. His activity was
prodigious. He was one of the most conspicuous
figures in the country. He brought the Commission
into universal repute. Under his spell it lost its
local character and became a national concern. He
was a Unitarian preacher; his immediate co-operators
were Unitarians; yet so broad and mundane
was he that no savor of sectarianism mingled with
his zeal, nor could it be suspected, except for his
aims, that he was a clergyman. As long as the
war lasted this energy continued, the enthusiasm
did not abate, the outpouring did not slacken.
It was not till the struggle was over that the
over-tasked brain craved repose. Then the reaction
was purely nervous, not in the least moral or intellectual.
He sprang up again and threw himself into
new enterprises with the old fervor and the old brilliancy
of speech, striving to awaken a desire for
religious unity, as he had promoted national concord.
The establishment of the National Conference of
Liberal Churches, which was to supplement the
-----File: 091.png---\\Beatrice\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
more local Unitarian Associations, was his suggestion.
The scheme did not entirely meet his expectations,
but this shows how large his expectations were, and
how comprehensive were his purposes of good. As
has been intimated already, his desires were in
advance of his practical ability. He was a man of
wishes rather than of expedients. His plans often
failed, but his aspirations were always pure and
lofty, and it was characteristic of him to impute the
failure of the special plan to some stubbornness in
the materials he attempted to manipulate, rather
than to any deficiency in his own faculty. Thus his
confidence in himself was sustained, and he went on
trying experiments and believing in his talent to
set anything, even communities and States, on their
feet.

People used to say that his advocacy was very
uncertain; that it was impossible to tell in advance
whether he would take a liberal or a conservative
view of a party or dogma; in short, he had the
reputation of being somewhat of a chameleon, of
catching his line from the last person he talked with.
One of his parishioners remarked, jestingly, that the
hearers of Dr. Bellows were taught in perfection one
lesson,--that of self-reliance. This was probably
true, as it was a general impression; and it illustrates
the warmth of his sympathy, the impressionableness
of his temperament, the readiness of his adaptation,
the facility of his discourse, as well as the want of
depth in his speculative intellect and his lack of
-----File: 092.png---\\TIMP\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------------
hold on fundamental principles. He was an advocate
by nature, not a theologian, a philosopher, or a
critic; an adept in speech, not a subtle or profound
thinker. He saw the effective points in either doctrine,
and chose the one that was most captivating
at the time. His eclecticism was simply ease of
transference, not a keen perception of the grounds
of identity. His logic was the skilful accommodation
to circumstances, not absolute fidelity to the
laws of reason. His affluence of diction and his
profusion of thoughts covered up his essential
poverty of insight, and persuaded some that he
looked farther than he did; but still it remains true
that he was not a sure guide in matters of opinion.
He was a most adroit, subtle, engaging talker, and
as such was of incalculable value; a fountain of entertainment,
and a source of influence. A decided
vein of Bohemianism ran through his character. He
was light-hearted, gay, versatile, fond of fun, restless,
addicted to society, abhorrent of solitude, darkness,
confinement; a friend of artists, musicians, wits; a
club-man; could smoke a cigar, and drink a glass of
wine, and tell a merry story; a man of quick
emotions, volatile some would call him, though of
unquestioned and unquestionable loyalty when any
principle was at stake, or any person he loved and
trusted was in trouble. Otherwise he forgot unpleasant
things and went to something else, dropping
the individual, but holding fast to the elements of
charity. This faculty of changing rapidly from one
-----File: 093.png---\\Beatrice\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
interest to another saved him from a vast deal of
fatigue, and enabled him to pursue his almost incredible
labors with less wear and tear than would have
been possible under other circumstances. The formation
of roots, and the necessity of pulling them up
frequently with a feeling of loss and pain, is sadly
weakening and disabling. This fosters a disposition
to stay at home, to form few ties, to remain quietly
where one is placed by destiny, to expose one's self
to no more disruptions than are appointed, to hide
one's self in a corner of existence, to avoid the wind.
The scholar hugs his library, reads books, meditates,
cultivates his mind, appears in public only when he
is prepared. The man of society dashes out and
deems the time wasted that is passed in the house.
Dr. Bellows once expressed his wonder that a friend
should have no desire to go abroad, but should be
content in his study.

He was a knight-errant, a Norman gentleman,
ever ready to succor the oppressed, but satisfied
when he had unhorsed the oppressor, though the
victim lay helpless on the ground. He derived his
name from "Belles Eaux." He was not a democrat
as implying one that had affinities with the people.
On the contrary, he was at bottom an aristocrat,
looking down on the people; but he was humane in
idea, holding it to be the part of a gentleman to
relieve the unfortunate. The motto, "<i>Noblesse
oblige</i>" applied to him exactly, with the understanding
that he belonged to the <i>Noblesse</i>, and was
-----File: 094.png---\\Beatrice\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
privileged to patronize. This tendency was prominent
in him. He would not allow a companion to
pay his car fare, because he would not borrow so
small a sum, but he confronted the man to whom he
had lent fifty dollars, and who had forgotten the
payment, as people often do. Meeting the defaulter
in the street, he reminded him of the transaction,
taxed him with infidelity to his engagements, and
had the satisfaction of receiving his money and
relieving his mind at the same time. Magnanimous
he was by nature. I will give a single instance of
it, out of several I could detail if personalities did not
forbid. When I first came to New York to found a
parish, there was a woman in my congregation,--an
angular, brusque woman, not sunny or agreeable,--whose
husband, being unfortunate, had, to repair his
fortune, gone to San Francisco; she stayed in New
York and kept school, for the purpose of educating
her children, and of eking out the family expenses.
One day, complaining to me of her lot and labor,
she spoke of certain prejudices against her as interfering
with her success, and accused Dr. Bellows of
being one of her enemies. Having satisfied myself
of the injustice of the impression about her, and of
her worthy deserving, I took occasion at once to
speak to Dr. Bellows on the subject. Reminding
him of the circumstances in which the woman was
placed, I asked him if he did not think she ought to
be helped instead of being hindered. He acknowledged
that he knew her, that he did not like her,
-----File: 095.png---\\Beatrice\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
that he had spoken harshly of her under the impression
that she was not deserving of moral support.
On my presentation of her case, and conviction that
he was wrong, he, being persuaded of his heedlessness,
offered to do everything in his power to repair
any mischief he might have caused. In my excitement,
I became audacious and suggested the drawing
up and signing of a paper,--about the most disagreeable
thing that could be proposed. But he assented,
prepared the paper, affixed his signature, and from
that hour did his utmost to befriend the woman
whom he took no pleasure in thinking of. This was
noble, even great. He could put his personal tastes
aside when a principle was involved.

It used to be urged against him that he dropped
people when he had done with them, and felt no
scruple in sacrificing them to his views of policy.
But it cannot be proved that he was false to anybody,
and his notion of the absolute unfitness of the
individual for his place, or of the man's unreliability,
was probably the real cause of his opposition. Probably,
in each instance of his withdrawal of confidence,
there were excellent reasons for his conduct, though
it was natural that those who were suddenly neglected
or displaced should feel indignant and aggrieved.
Dr. Bellows was not one to act on a private
prejudice or a personal pique. His affections were
strong and would have led him to make any concession
that was consistent with what he regarded
as his public duty. No doubt he was somewhat
-----File: 096.png---\\TravellersJoy\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------
imperious in judging what his duty was; he lacked
the useful faculty of remaining in the background;
he was impetuous and forward; but he never was
or could be insincere, and he always had a sufficient
explanation of the course he pursued,--an explanation
perfectly satisfactory to one who bore his temperament
in mind and considered what he could do and
what he could not.

A most lovable, cordial, faithful man I always
found him,--a man to be depended on in difficult
and trying times, high-minded, courageous, daring,
ready to enter the breach, happiest when leading a
forlorn hope, straight-forward, inspiring, easily lifted
beyond himself, and imparting nervous vigor to his
followers. Followers he must have, for he was not
content to obey any behest; but then his leadership
was so hearty and wholesome, so free from superciliousness,
so abundant in expressions of loyalty,
that it was a joy to go with him. He was more than
willing to do his share of hard work, and to indulge
his servants. If one could forbear to cross him, he
was friendliness itself; a warm advocate of liberty,
only insisting that liberty and progress should march
hand in hand; that private idiosyncrasies should not
stand in the way of practical advance. He was a
very different man from Dr. Dewey, yet he loved
Dr. Dewey devotedly while life lasted. He was an
entirely different man from me in temperament and
in gifts,--quite opposite in fact,--yet he was one of
the best of my friends as long as he lived, seldom
-----File: 097.png---\\TravellersJoy\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------
resenting my radicalism, never impatient of my slowness,
but warm, sunny, helpful to the end, the man
to whom I instinctively resorted for sympathy in the
most painful passages of my career.

In a word, the foundation of his character was
impulse. He was a man of fiery zeal, of moral passion,
of vast enthusiasm, and when a storm of spiritual
power came sweeping down from some unseen
height, he was easily carried away. This impulsive
character explains his chivalry of disposition, his
magnanimity, his self-abnegation; for though he was
self-asserting, he could at once forget himself, and
sink his own individuality entirely when some cause
he had at heart strongly appealed to him. This
impulsiveness explains, too, his theological inconsistency,
for when the popular feeling struck him,
he was carried away in a different direction from
what he had first proposed. For instance, once--I
think it was at Buffalo--he gave a most eloquent
plea for individualism, having determined to speak
in favor of institutions; and in Boston when he had
been expected to uphold a creed, he was so borne
away by the opposite sentiment that, when he ended,
a creed seemed absolutely impossible.

A very different person from the foregoing was Dr.
Samuel Osgood, the successor of Dr. Dewey in the
Church of the Messiah on Broadway, and the close
associate of the pastor of "All Souls," which name
he suggested when the new edifice on the corner of
Fourth Avenue and Twentieth Street was christened.
-----File: 098.png---\\TravellersJoy\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------
He was a lover of ecclesiasticism, of forms, usages,
ceremonials, though he was not unmindful of the
ideas that lay beneath them, and too good a New
Englander, too good a Unitarian, too staunch a
friend of free thought to be anything but a liberal
Protestant; a man of names and dates, and instituted
observances, not "electric," "magnetic," or a
leader either of thought or action; not a man of
deep emotions, or moving eloquence in or out of the
pulpit; not a man of long reach or wide influence,
but conspicuous in his way, unique, worth studying
as a figure in his generation.

He was devoted to books, of which he read and
produced many, and might have been called learned,
yet he was not a closet man, not a recluse; on the
contrary, he knew about public affairs, talked about
what was going on in the world, attended political,
social, and literary meetings, was a member of the
prominent clubs, like the "Century" and the "Union
League," was for years the Corresponding Secretary
of the "Historical Society," rather prided himself,
in fact, on the number and intimacy of his outside
relations. With all this, he was a diligent pastor,
an excellent denominationalist, a dependence on all
church occasions within his sect, a speaker at conventions,
a worker of the ecclesiastical machinery,
a man much relied on for denominational work.

His writings were numerous. In fact he always
seemed to have the pen in his hand. Besides the
books which are known,--"Studies in Christian
-----File: 099.png---\\TravellersJoy\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------
Biography," "The Hearthstone," "God with Men,"
"Milestones in Our Life Journey," "Student Life,"--all
popular once,--he contributed frequently to
the <i>Christian Examiner</i>, the <i>North American Review</i>,
the <i>Bibliotheca Sacra</i>, and other important
magazines; delivered orations, printed theological
discourses, especially a famous one before the theological
school at Meadville, Pennsylvania, on "The
Coming Church and its Clergy," and for several
months, during Mr. Curtis' illness, prepared the
essays in the "Easy Chair" for <i>Harper's Monthly
Magazine</i>. His interest in matters of education and
literature was incessant, active, and useful. He
made speeches, served on committees, prepared reports,
in every way tried to serve the cause of
rational knowledge. Yet with all his industry and
all his ability--for he possessed ability of no mean
order,--he had a mind singularly destitute of vitality.
His ingenuity, his pleasantry, his sententiousness,
his versatility, could not conceal this lack of
organic power. His vivacity did not exhilarate, his
happy expressions did not create the sense of life in
the mind, but were like artificial flowers that had no
perfume, and reminded one more of the perfection
of art than of the involuntary sweetness of nature.
He was destitute of genius to inspire. It is the
more wonderful that he could persevere, as he did,
without the popular recognition that his talents
merited, or the applause his endeavors deserved.
He had praise, to be sure, but it was not hearty or
-----File: 100.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
effusive, and they who rendered it probably wondered
why they could not put more soul into their
laudation. The address was brilliant, but not warming.
One must come within arm's length of him to
feel the beating of his heart, to be sensible of his
force. He was unable to project himself far, and
relied upon incidental advantages of occasion for
effects which he could not produce by genius.

He was a most affectionate man, dependent, clinging,
always ready to serve, obliging, docile, patient,
without hardness and without guile. He was devoted
to his family, faithful to his friends, never
allowing differences of opinion to interfere with his
duty towards those who might expect support from
him, but fulfilling disagreeable offices when he felt
that loyalty made perfect truthfulness incumbent.
There was something touching in his fidelity towards
men who gave him nothing but outside recognition,
and who were willing to abandon him when
he could no longer be useful. There was something
plaintive in his readiness to work for men who accepted
his labor as a matter of course, and allowed
him to throw away his love. He, for his part, asked
no reward, but was quite satisfied if his service was
accepted kindly by those to whom he rendered it.
Not that he did not like recognition; he did, and
the more public it was the better he liked it. For
he was fond of notoriety, had a craving for publicity,
and was happiest when a multitude applauded.
This may have grown out of his affectionateness,
-----File: 101.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
for he reached forth his arms as widely as possible,
and wanted to hear the sound of many approving
voices, needing sympathy and the assurance that he
was conferring pleasure, the noise of plaudits reassuring
his heart. Still he could do without this, if
he was certain of the attachment of a single warm
friend. Recognition of some sort was essential to
his peace, for he did not possess independence enough
to stand alone, and he cared too much for individuals
to be easy if they were displeased. He gave
himself a great deal of pain, worried, took infinite
trouble about imaginary sorrows, not being able to
feel or to affect indifference, and being destitute of
the robustness of character necessary to throw off
unpleasant things; for his ambition, not springing
from vitality of mind, was no guard against griefs of
the spirit. He that cannot lose himself in his studies
fails to derive from them their best satisfaction,--that
of consolation and refuge. He stands naked to
the wind, and, if his skin is tender, suffers acutely.

Dr. Osgood was intensely self-conscious, self-regarding,
self-referring. Not vain in the ordinary
sense, though he seemed so from his countenance,
attitude, manner, for all of which, I am persuaded,
nature was more responsible than disposition, his
physical formation producing a certain carriage that
suggested superciliousness and conceit. If he were
forth-putting, it was, in most instances at least, because
he lacked self-reliance, and wished to be <i>seen</i>,
knowing that he could not be <i>felt</i>. In reality he
-----File: 102.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
was a modest, timid, shrinking man, with an inordinate
desire for distinction, which impelled him continually
to make a demonstration in public. Mere
vanity--the love of appearances--he was destitute
of, for he was too tender-hearted and too conscientious
to make victims. One must be self-centred to
be vain, as he was not. I recollect his coming one
day into the office of the <i>Christian Inquirer</i>, with
his head up as usual, and calling out in a loud voice:
"Where do you think I went on my way down
town?" Of course none of us knew or could guess.
"Well," he went on to say, with an air of complacency,
"I stopped at Fowler & Wells' and had my
head examined." "Ah!" exclaimed one of the impudent,
"did they find anything, Sam?" "What
they did <i>not</i> find," he said, "will interest you more.
They declared that I was deficient in self-respect,
and it is true." And it <i>was</i> true. Samuel Osgood
assumed a brave air, for the reason that he could not
trust himself in the open field. He needed the protection
of a rampart. He wore a showy uniform,
because he was not valiant. He had too much self-esteem
to forget himself, and too little courage to
assert himself; the consequence was that he said and
did numerous things that looked vainglorious and
were absurd, but which were intended to conceal his
impuissance. It was an innocent kind of bravado,
like poor Oliver Proudfute's, in Scott's romance,
"The Fair Maid of Perth." Nobody was hurt by
it, though to him the passion for notoriety was fatal.
-----File: 103.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
He liked to see his name in a newspaper, coveting
the kind of reputation that came in that way, and
comforting his heart with the thought of lying on
the broad bosom of the community. His restless
desire for public notice brought ridicule on him, for
ordinary people ascribed it to his conceit, whereas it
rather indicated an absence of self-confidence. It
was a cloak to hide his depreciation at the same time
that it made him look larger in the general eye. It
was, therefore, more touching than despicable, and if
it excited mirth there was nothing bitter in the smile
which could not break into laughter. Selfish he
could not be called, for he was always serving others,
and disinterestedly too; but on a charge of complacency
he could hardly be acquitted. This was the
manner in which he took his reward, and, as I said,
it cost nothing to anybody, while the public received
a great deal of service very ungrudgingly bestowed.

The change from Unitarianism to Episcopacy is
very easily explained. His craving for sympathy
was boundless. He was necessarily isolated in New
York, nor had he the solace of a great popular success.
In fact his following was small; his church
was dwindling; his reputation was certainly not increasing;
and he became persuaded, I think without
sufficient reason, that he was the victim of adverse
influences. In London, he was charmed with the
blended freedom and sanctity of the "Broad
Church" represented by Stanley, Kingsley, Jowett,
and a host of cultivated men; by its unity amid
-----File: 104.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
diversity; its sympathy and fellowship and large
scholarship. Here was a church indeed; wide,
holy, liberal, devout, with articles admitting of
various interpretations, sacraments tender and elastic,
forms that did not constrain, and usages that did
not bind, an unlimited range of speculation, and a
spirit of reverence that kept the most widely separated
together. Here was something very different
from the sectarianism he had, all his life, been accustomed
to, and, all his life, had loathed. He
joined this Communion not so much on account of
its <i>creed</i> as of its <i>creedlessness;</i> not as another form of
denominationalism, but as an escape from denominationalism;
a real, living, comprehensive church, where
there was room for all Christian souls, whatever
their special mode of belief; a Protestant church
with a truly catholic temper, cordial, humane, courteous;
with a respect for literature, and a love for
knowledge; with no jealousy or ill-will, or fear of
thought. His heart was warmed, his fancy fired.
Shortly after his return, as he sat in my study, I
asked him if he had materially changed his theology.
He replied that he had not, he had simply altered
the <i>emphasis;</i> as much as to say that in substance
it remained what it was before, essentially Unitarian,
as he understood that designation. In fact, his sermons
were to all intents and purposes the same;
they never abounded in doctrine, they did not now;
they were always "sentimental," in the sense of
dealing with sentiment, they were so still. He was
-----File: 105.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
not a prime favorite with Episcopalians in America.
He was not narrow or strict enough for the orthodox;
he was not "sensational" enough for the liberals;
he was too ecclesiastical for the Low Churchmen;
too rationalistic for the High Churchmen;
and his failure to communicate warmth was not
favorable to his attractiveness. There were not
many Broad Church ministers in New York, so that
his circle of fellowship was small; and on the whole
the reception was a disappointment. He longed for
recognition, which he found among many of his old
associates, as he did not find it among his new
friends. He was always a churchman when he was
a Unitarian; he was no more of a churchman now,
and the sympathy he sought he might have found in
his former connection. Probably had he lived
elsewhere than in New York, where the competition
was sharp, and where individuality alone without
distinguished power counted for nothing, he would
have continued Unitarian, and been happy, but he
was ambitious of eminence; he wanted to live in a
great city, to be minister of a metropolitan parish, to
be a Doctor of Divinity, and for all this he lacked
the force. There was a perpetual conflict between
his aspirations and his vigor. He joined the Episcopal
fraternity, hoping for what none but those
born into it attain without energy of an exalted
kind. His ancient comrades fell away, as was
natural; he could not win other comrades, and his
later years became lonely. He cared more for
-----File: 106.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
Christian fellowship than for any other; and he had
not the power to secure this. Thus his affectionateness
was against him. He was a loyal man, true to
his convictions, faithful to the bent of his mind. He
could not be a deceiver or a renegade, and his heart
was not strong enough or wide enough to push him
forward.

Some thought him deficient in common-sense, and
this is, in a sense, true. He had not the force to
carry projects through, nor had he the hearty accord
with the people of his generation that would give
him an instinctive insight into their wishes and
enable him to strike into the current of their designs.
His self-reference always stood in the way of
his sympathy with other men; yet he often took
practical views of speculative questions, and curbed
a propensity to moral enthusiasm on the part of
some of his associates. This, however, was due to
his timidity, to his absence of vigor, to his want
of vital conviction, rather than to any clearness
of perception. He had no humor, no sense of the
incongruous, the incompatible, or the absurd. He
named rocks, groves, arbors, on his summer estate,
after the famous poets, and used to sit in turn on the
seats he had thus immortalized. He said things that
no man of taste would have uttered, and did things
that no man of judgment would have been guilty of.
But all this was owing to the absence of sensible
qualities rather than to the presence of visionary
ones. He was not perverse, stubborn, or wrong-*
-----File: 107.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
*headed, did not outrage common opinion, or fly in
the face of established prejudice. His want of
good sense was negative, not positive; innocent, not
harmful.

Such men have their uses and their place, and
neither is small or low. His love of learning, his
devotion to duty, his friendliness, his fidelity, his
kindliness, were rare gifts, particularly rare in communities
like ours. His child-like conceit, very different
from the aggressive vanity that offends the
sensitive soul, was not offensive or noxious, and was
a source of harmless amusement. His guilelessness
was more than touching; it was admirable as an
example and as a lesson, in an age that honors
knowledge of the world beyond its deserts; and his
simplicity of nature, his trustingness, his ingenuousness,
rendered him a confiding friend, dear to those
whose hearts were sore. Few men living have so
small a number of enemies. He did not provoke
the hostility he received. It was possible to be
sorry for him; it was impossible to bear him malice.

As I think of him, the vision arises of a complacent
man, with a loud greeting, a metallic voice,
an outstretched hand, a consequential manner. All
this is dust and ashes, but his singleness of intention
is not dead. When everything else is forgotten, his
faithfulness will be remembered.

Both these men gave me a warm welcome; in
fact, my relations were most friendly among the
other Unitarian ministers in the neighborhood. It
-----File: 108.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
was anticipated, no doubt, that I would establish a
third Unitarian Society "up town," of a liberal type;
but a wide departure from the existing order was
not suspected. The expectation was that the usual
doctrines were to be proclaimed; that the sacraments
were to be administered; that the regular
order was to be observed. Perhaps my willingness
to undertake such an enterprise was regarded as
a sign of concession on my part; perhaps it was
supposed that the conservative tone of the city,
together with the attitude of the other churches,
would repress the radical tendencies of the young
clergyman; perhaps the trials incident to a new
society and the confusions of the time concealed
somewhat the real bearing of the undertaking.
However this may be, there was no opposition, no
criticism, no dictation, no proscription of radical
leanings. My congregations were composed of all
sorts of people. There were Unitarians, Universalists,
"come-outers," spiritualists, unbelievers of
all kinds, anti-slavery people, reformers generally.
But this, as being incidental to the formation of
every liberal society, was not objected to. It need
not have been; for if there had been no interruption,
no check, everything might have gone smoothly, as
in similar societies since.
-----File: 109.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------




VIII.

WAR.


Hardly had I got warm in my place when the
mutterings of war were in the air. During the autumn
of 1859, on the 16th of October, John Brown
planned his attack on Harper's Ferry. His was a
portentous figure. His position in history--greater
than his achievements would warrant--was due partly
to his position as herald of the coming strife, but
mainly to his personal qualities. These were colossal;
however much one may criticise his particular
deeds, or the details of his motive, these qualities
can not be exalted too highly. His courage, heroism,
patience, fortitude, were most extraordinary. Even
Governor Wise, the man whose duty it was to see
him tried and executed as a felon, said of him;
"They are mistaken who take Brown to be a madman.
He is a bundle of the best nerves I ever saw;
cut and thrust and bleeding and in bonds. He is a
man of clear head, of courage, fortitude, and simple
ingenuousness. He is cool, collected, indomitable;
and it is but just to him to say that he was humane
to his prisoners, and he inspired me with great trust
-----File: 110.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
in his integrity as a man of truth." Colonel Washington,
another Virginia witness, testified to the
extraordinary coolness with which Brown felt the
pulse of his dying son, while he held his own rifle in
the other hand, and cheered on his men. His character
made his prison cell a shrine. On the day
of his execution, December 2, 1859, he stood under
the gallows with the noose round his neck for full
ten minutes while military evolutions were performed;
he never wavered a moment, and died with
nerves still subject to his iron will. He was a Calvinistic
believer in predestination; a real Covenanter,
more like the Scotch Covenanters of two centuries
ago than anything we know of to-day. He was an
Old-Testament man, and like all fanatics was indifferent
to death, either that of other men or his
own. His anti-slavery zeal began in his youth. He
early took an oath to make war against slavery, and,
it is said, called his older sons together on one occasion
and made them pledge themselves, kneeling in
prayer, to the anti-slavery crusade. This purpose
he always bore in mind, whatever else he was doing;
he even chose the spot for his attempt--the
mountains which Washington had selected as a final
retreat should he be defeated by the English. Nearly
nine years before his own death, he exhorted the
members of the "League of Gileadites" to stand by
one another and by their friends as long as a drop of
blood remained and be hanged, if they must, but to
tell no tales out of school.
-----File: 111.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------

Then came the war. Though its physical aspect,--the
loss of treasure and of blood--was most affecting,
I cannot but think that its mental and moral
aspect has been underrated. Its whole justification
lay in its moral character, and I must believe that
full justice has never been done to those who were
obliged to stay at home and uphold this feature.
The preacher of the Gospel of Peace had as much as
he could do to overcome the horrors of war; and
the preacher of Righteousness was engaged all the
time in promoting the cause of justice. They who
went to the front had the excitement of battle, the
pleasures of camp-life, the assistance of comradeship,
the comfort of sympathy. The preacher had none
of these. Every day rumors were reaching his ears;
"extras" were flying about in the silence; he had to
comfort people under defeat, to humble them in
hours of victory; to interpret the conflict in accordance
with the principles of equity; to keep alive
the moral issues of the struggle. This was an incessant
weariness and anxiety; to fight foes one could
not see, and to uphold a cause that was discredited,
fell to his portion; it is no wonder that when the
war was over he was spent and aged.

An illustration of a part of what he had to contend
with is found in the riot of the summer of
1863. This was an anti-abolitionist riot, a fierce
protest against the conscription, and at the same
time an uprising against the government, which was
supposed to maintain a war of the blacks against
-----File: 112.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
the whites. The riot was directed against the negroes
and the abolitionists, and was pitiless and
ferocious in the extreme. It was my lot to be in
New York in that dreadful week in July. I was
visiting friends in the upper part of the town when
the uproar began. As I walked home down Madison
Avenue a group of rough men met me; one of
them snatched at my watch chain, and I should have
been maltreated had not more attractive game in the
shape of people in a buggy drawn away the attention
of my assailants. I reached my home is[**in] safety.
The next morning, as I walked about the city, there
were groups of men standing idle, or armed with
missiles, in almost every street. Had the mob been
organized then it might have done more mischief
than it did, for the inhabitants of the city were unprepared
and unprotected. As I stood at night on
my roof, I could see the fires in different parts of
the town, and hear the shots. An arsenal stood on
Seventh Avenue, near my house, full of arms and
ammunition which the insurgents wanted. When
the United States troops arrived, they defended this
arsenal. Cannons were pointed up and down the
street, guards were posted, officers with their clanking
swords marched up and down before my door.
The riot lasted three days,--from the 13th to the
16th. On the following Sunday a sermon was
preached which gives expression to the better
thoughts of the wisest people, and from which accordingly
extracts are made:
-----File: 113.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------

/#
Of all the dreadful and melancholy passages in the history
of human progress, none, to a thoughtful man, are more dreadful
or melancholy than those which tell how men have resisted,
pushed away, reviled, cursed, beaten, mobbed, crucified their
benefactors. It does seem, as we read them, as if the most
dreaded thing on earth had been the personal, the domestic,
the social welfare; as if the deepest anxiety on the part of
men of all sorts was an anxiety to escape from their health and
salvation; as if the profoundest dread was a dread of mending
their estates, and their utmost horror was a horror of
heaven! It does seem, as we read, as if happiness, prosperity,
success, were the pet aversion of mankind; as if the signs
that were looked for with the most agonized apprehension
were the signs that the kingdom of heaven was at hand ...
We saw this conspicuously and dismally exemplified in the
events of the past week. The one man who, before and above
all others, was a mark for the rage of the populace, the one
man whose name was loud in the rabble's mouth, and always
coupled with a malediction, the one man who was hunted for
his blood as by wolves, who would have been torn in pieces
had the opportunity been afforded, and on whose account the
dwelling of a friend was literally torn in pieces, was a man
who had been the steadfast friend of these very people who
hungered for his blood; their most constant, uncompromising,
and public friend; thinking for them, speaking for them,
writing for them; pleading their cause through the press, in
the legislature, from the platform; excusing their mistakes and
follies, asserting and reasserting their substantial worth and
honesty and rectitude, advocating their claims as working people,
vindicating their rights as men; proposing schemes for the
safety of their persons, the healthfulness of their houses, the
saving and increase of their earnings, the education of their
children, the exemption of their homesteads from seizure in
cases of debt, the enlargement of their sphere of labor, the
transferring of their families from the crowded city, where
they could do little more than keep themselves alive by arduous
-----File: 114.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
toil, to the fruitful lands of the West, where they could
become noble and self-respecting men and women. This was
the man whose blood was hungered for. I need not speak his
name,--you know whom I mean, Horace Greeley,--a man
whom some call visionary, but whose visions are all of the
redemption of the people; whom some call "fool," but who, if
he seem a fool, is foolish that the people may be wise; whom
some call "radical," but whose radicalism is simply a determination
that the popular existence shall have a sound, sure, and
deep root in natural law and moral principle; at all events, a
man who has lived for the people and suffered for the people,
and been laughed at when he suffered and because he suffered.
<i>This<i> was the man whose blood was hungered for. And
yet the most moderate, kind, considerate of all the papers, the
last week, was his paper. And I believe he, even had he
fallen into the hands of his enemies, would have said, "Forgive
them, they know not what they do."

Indulge me in one more personality. I said that the dwelling
of a friend was pillaged by the mob, under the impression
that Mr. Greeley lived there. What was this dwelling? Who
was this friend? The dwelling was one the like of which
is rare in any city, a dwelling of happiness and peace, a home
of the tenderest domestic affections, a house of large friendliness
and hospitality, a refuge and abiding-place for the unfortunate
and the outcast. There was no display of wealth there--there
was no wealth to display; yet the house was full of
things which no wealth could buy. It was crowded with
mementos. The pieces of furniture in the rooms had family
histories connected with them; chairs and tables were precious
from association with noble and rare people who had gone.
Pictures on the walls, busts in the parlor, engravings, photographs,
books, spoke of the gratitude or love of some dear
giver. One room was sacred to the memory of a noble boy,
an only son, who had died some years before. There was his
bust in marble, there were his books, there were the prints
he liked, the little bits of art he was fond of, and all the dear
#/
-----File: 115.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
/#
things that seemed to bring him back. The whole house was a
shrine and a sanctuary.

And who were the inmates? The master, a man whose
sympathies were always and completely with the working-people,
a man of steady and boundless humanity; the mistress,
a woman whose name is familiar to all doers of good
deeds in the city of New York, and dear to hundreds of the
objects of good deeds. To the orphan and friendless and
poor, a mother; to the unfortunate, a sister; to the wretched,
the depraved, the sinful, more than a friend. In the city
prison her presence was the presence of an angel of pitying
love; at Blackwell's Island she was welcome as a spirit of
peace and hope. The boys at Randall's Island looked into
her face as the face of an angel. Again and again had she
rescued from the life of shame the countrywoman, and possibly
the kindred of these very people who plundered her house.
For the better part of a year and more she has been in camp
and city hospitals, nursing their brothers and sons, performing
every menial office. At this moment she is at Point Lookout,
doing that work, amid discomforts and discouragements that
would daunt a less resolute humanity than hers, giving all she
has and is to the <i>people</i>, to the wounded, crippled, bleeding,
and broken people; giving it for the sake of the people--giving
it that the people may be raised to a higher social level!
And she, forsooth, must be selected to have her house pillaged!
She must be stabbed to her heart of hearts, stabbed through
and through, in every one of her affections, by these people
for whom her life had been a perpetual process of dying!
Why, if they had but known this that I have been telling you,
or but a tenth part of it, those men would have defended with
their bodies every thread of carpet she trod on. But so it
was, and so it must be! Only the best names are ever taken
in vain on human lips, and they are so taken because they are
the best, and best is worst to those who cannot understand it.
Theodore Winthrop was shot by a negro. Did he know what
he did? ... In thinking of it one's bosom is torn with
#/
-----File: 116.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
/#
distracting emotions, and between feeling for the persecuted
and feeling for the persecutors, one almost loses the power of
feeling. Could anything be more pitiful? Yes, one thing
more pitiful there was--the savage hunting down and persecution
of the negroes, as if they, too, were the enemies of these
working-people. The poor, inoffensive negroes, most innocent
part of the whole population! Most quiet, harmless, docile
people, who could not stand in the way of the white people
if they would, and who never thought of anything but
of keeping out of their way! These the enemies of white
labor! As if they had not, for these very white people,
borne the burden and heat of the tropical day, raising the
cotton by which we are clothed, and the rice by which
we are fed! As if to these and the like of these, the white
people did not owe a large share of the manufacturing towns
where they get their bread! As if the lowest foundation
stones of this very New York of ours were not cemented by
their bloody sweat! As if there were too many of them in
the country now for the country's needs, supposing the country
ever to fall into a settled and civilized condition again!
As if all there are might not by and by be <i>required</i> to do the
work which white labor can not for a long time, if it can ever,
safely undertake! Strange complications of things! Strange
cross-purposes of human nature! The Southern people would
revive the slave trade, because they have not black laborers
enough, and their allies among ourselves would banish or kill
all the black people, because they interfere with white labor!
A mutual stabbing at each other's hearts! And on each side
a stabbing to its own heart! ... It is a very mysterious
thing in history, this alliance between the most turbulent and
the most tyrannical, the most depraved and the most despotic
portions of society. The most undisciplined, barbarous,
savage members of a community are ever in a league with the
most overbearing, insolent, imperious, and domineering members
of it. They who are under the least self-control bow
most deferentially before those who rule others with the most
#/
-----File: 117.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
/#
cruel rod. The people who were proudest of having turned
out to a man, in London, for the maintenance of law and
order, on the day of the great Chartist demonstration there,
were the most immoral class in the city--proved by the criminal
returns to be nine times as dishonest, five times as drunken,
and nine times as savage as the rest of the community. (See
Spencer's "Social Statics," p. 424.)

In Boston, on the occasion of the rendition of Anthony
Burns, all the thieves, burglars, cut-throats, swarmed from
their dens and volunteered with alacrity to enforce the fugitive-slave
law. And now the leaders of the Southern Confederacy
count, and count securely, on the Northern populace.
The fiercest allies of the only absolutely despotic class in the
country are the outlaws of society. The men who are fighting
for the privileges of the extremest tyranny, the privileges
not of ruling merely, but literally of owning the laboring class,
these men have the implicit, unquestioning, fanatical loyalty
of the people who are at the opposite end of the social scale--the
people who own nothing either of fortune, position, influence,
or character, and whose sole relation towards the despots
they worship is that of mad, savage slaves.

In Europe this alliance between the despotic and the
lawless may be fortunate for the peace of the community.
In our Southern States it is eminently conducive to the
tranquillity they desire. But when the lawless are here and
the despotic are there, when the barbarism is in New York and
the tyranny in Richmond, when the elements of discord and
turbulence in our Northern cities fly to support their iron-handed
rulers in the seceded States, there ensues a state of
things, especially in time of war, that is calculated to shake
society to its foundations, and fill every loyal heart with dread.
The unruly, as if they felt instinctively their lack of self-control,
seek a ruler--fly to the strongest to save them from
themselves, worship the sternest, the most high-handed, the
cruellest, and by that natural sympathy with brutality are
maintained in subjection to law.
#/
-----File: 118.png---\\Frau Sma\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------

/#
Heaven speed the time when these heedless, reckless,
licentious children of humanity may feel sensible of the weight
of power without its brutality, may reverence authority when
it is neither beastly nor cruel, may yield obedience to Order,
whose symbol is not the sword, and to Law, whose badge is
not the bayonet. But till that time comes, we, with thoughtful
minds and sad hearts and sober consciences, and souls full
as we can make them of human charity and good-will, must
hold in our hands those terrible symbols, and in the Christian
spirit do the ruler's part.
#/

The insurrection did not last long. As soon as
the United States troops appeared the trouble was
over and order was restored. There was fighting;
there was pillage; but how many lives were lost and
how much property was destroyed was never exactly
known. On the whole, the riot strengthened
the hands of the government, increased pity for the
victims of outrage, and excited sympathy for the
negroes and the abolitionists. The priests, as I well
remember, helped in the work of pacification. On
the second day of the uprising, as I was visiting
a friend in his studio on Fifth Avenue, the mob
came along, shouting, yelling, brandishing clubs, on
their way to the archbishop's palace, to hear an
address by him. The prelate appeared on the balcony
dressed in full canonicals, in order to impress
the people, and delivered a most ingenious and persuasive
address. Beginning "Men of New York,"
he flattered their self-esteem, paid a tribute to their
sense of power and exalted influence, and advised
them against cruelty and anarchy. The effect of
-----File: 119.png---\\Frau Sma\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
this speech was surprising in soothing and quieting
the crowd. They had come there in a mood of
tumult--they separated peacefully and went to their
own homes, satisfied. From that hour the soul of the
riot was broken.

The incidents of the war cannot be detailed here.
The story has been told too often, and is altogether
too long for my space. And after all the moral
issues of the war were the most interesting though
not the most pathetic. The sentiment of union, the
establishment of the national supremacy, the authority
of the reign of law, the emancipation of a
degraded race, the new inspiration imparted to a
great people, and the advent of a universal republicanism
were most significant. It is quite likely that
the modern uprising of labor and the urgent claims
of women for recognition and civil power were
aided, if not suggested, by this overwhelming triumph
of order and enlightenment. It is more than
likely that the position of the United States, as a
power among the nations of the earth, was due
mainly to the victory that was achieved by the
powers of liberty.
-----File: 120.png---\\Frau Sma\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------




IX.

THE FREE RELIGIOUS ASSOCIATION.


The happy ending of the war stimulated, as has
been said, the sentiment of Unity. The success of
the government in putting down the rebellion filled
the air with the spirit of union. The restoration of
political harmony suggested a deeper harmony, when
divisions should cease. At this moment, in April,
1865, the indefatigable Dr. Bellows, who had been
the soul of the Sanitary Commission, summoned all
Christian believers of the liberal persuasions to a
convention in his church for a more complete organization.
The invitation was most generously interpreted,
and was hailed by some who could be called
Christians only under the most elastic definition of
the term. A prominent layman of the Unitarian
body brought an elaborate creed which he wished
the convention to adopt; and a distinguished minister
of the West was of the opinion that the work
of perfect organization could best be done by the
adoption of stringent articles of faith. But the
minimum of belief was imposed. The preamble
of the constitution, the work of reconciling minds,
-----File: 121.png---\\Frau Sma\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
reads thus: "Whereas the great opportunities and
demands for Christian labor and consecration, at
this time, increase our sense of the obligations of all
disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ to prove their
faith by self-denial and by the devotion of their
lives and possessions to the service of God, and
the building up of the kingdom of his son, Therefore."
Then follow the articles. It was this phrase,
"Lord Jesus Christ," that provoked discussion. The
struggle was renewed at Syracuse on October 8th of
the next year, 1866, and an attempt was made to
explain away the force of the declaration by announcing
that while the preamble and articles of the
constitution represented the opinions of the majority,
yet they were not to be considered an authoritative
test of Unitarianism, or to exclude from fellowship
any who though differing in belief "are in general
sympathy with our purpose and practical aims."
But this was not considered by the radicals as satisfactory.
For in the first place the title of "Lord"
seemed to contain by implication a doctrine which
could not be subscribed to, as the "Lordship" of
Jesus was supposed to be supernatural. Here
seemed to be a fundamental difference between
those who held to the old world's idea of a spiritual
kingdom, and those who proclaimed the new world's
idea of a spiritual democracy. In fact, one of the
leaders--Dr. Bellows--plainly said if there was to
be any change it must be made in the other direction;
"we are to consider not only the few on the
-----File: 122.png---\\Frau Sma\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
one side, who may or may not care to unite with us,
but the great body of Christians of all denominations,
the Universal Church of Christ; I demand
liberality to them, the liberality which acknowledges
their Lord and Leader, and welcomes them to a
household whose hearth glows with faith in and
loyalty to the personal Saviour." It was plainly declared
by him that Unitarians assumed the name of
liberal Christians, because they allowed liberality of
inquiry and opinion <i>within the pale of Christian
discipleship</i>. This of itself was enough to create a
palpable division, but it was felt besides that freedom
of interpretation did not imply freedom of rejection.
The phrase <i>Lordship of Jesus</i>, although as
little of a creed as could be devised, was hostile to
freedom, besides not being altogether true, as Jesus
never claimed to be infallible. The radicals, under
the lead of Francis E. Abbot, attempted to introduce
a substitute for the original preamble, inculcating
unity of spirit and of work as the basis of the "National
Conference of Unitarian and Independent
Churches." This substitute was not carried, and a
final breach between the Independents and the Unitarians
was thus established. This was inevitable
twenty-five years ago; it could not happen to-day,
when both wings are united in one body.

For my part I did not go to Syracuse, having
foreseen what eventually occurred, namely, the intended
solidification of the Unitarian body by the
strengthening of the bonds of organization. My own
-----File: 123.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
personal experience, which other radicals knew
nothing of, led me to this conclusion. My church
edifice on 40th Street was begun in the spring of
1863. The two ministers in New York were present
at the informal service of laying the corner-stone.
The walls were going up during the summer; on the
week of the riot the mob called the workmen off,
threatening to destroy what was built if the masons
did not leave. The building was finished in the
winter, and dedicated on Christmas Day. To the
warm personal invitation which was sent to all the
Unitarian clergy in New York and Brooklyn--there
were but three then--no response was returned; and
when my father and I went to the church there were
no ministers on the platform. We went through
the service, my father offering the prayer and I
preaching the sermon. No remark was made at the
time beyond an expression of surprise at the non-appearance
of the "brethren." The next day my
father, who had come from Boston on purpose to
attend the dedication, and whose blindness was
approaching fast, went to make a friendly visit on
Dr. Bellows. On his return, when asked if any
reason was assigned for the failure to participate in
the proceedings of the day before, he said that the
duties of Christmas were alleged as the cause. I was
sure there was another explanation behind; and as
soon as I had put my father in the train for home
wrote to Dr. Bellows, taxing him among the rest
with discourtesy. It was evident that such a charge
-----File: 124.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
was anticipated and prepared for; that the ministers
had met and had agreed on a course to be pursued
in my case. For at once there came a reply to my
note, accusing me of studiously neglecting all the
usual observances of the denomination. My invitation
had not been official; there was no "church";
there had never been any sacrament; the allegiance
to fundamental doctrines of the sect had been slack.
All this was true, and no attempt at exculpation
was made, but it was felt that a breach existed.
The excitements of the war overshadowed everything
else at this period, and nothing more was said.
My Society was duly represented at the first
conference; but as soon as our side was argued,--as it
was by D. A. Wasson,--it was plain that the spirit
of organization prevailed and was against us. A
division was inevitable. The "Independents" must
form a separate party.

This virtual exclusion occasioned the formation of
the Free Religious Association. A meeting was
held on the 5th of February, 1867, at Dr. C. A. Bartol's,
in Boston, to consider a plan for creating a new
association on the basis of free thought. Very
strong words were spoken on that occasion. One
man, I recollect, spoke of all churches, all ministers,
and all religion as being outgrown. But the majority
were of the opinion that religion was an
eternal necessity, and the administration of it an
absolute demand. Dr. Bartol himself was always a
warm friend of the Association, appearing on the
-----File: 125.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
platform, speaking always hopefully, one of the
most welcome of its supporters. The Association
was formed in the spring of that same year. In the
plan of organization it was distinctly announced that
the aim of the Association was to "promote the interest
of pure religion, to encourage the scientific
study of theology, and to increase fellowship in the
spirit; and to this end all persons interested in these
objects are cordially invited to its membership."
Thus the object of the Association was exceedingly
broad. It proposed to remove all dividing lines and
to unite all religious men in bonds of pure spirituality,
each one being responsible for his own opinion
alone, and in no degree affected in his relations with
other associations. If the movement had been in
the hands of orthodox and well-reputed people, it
would have seemed not only large but noble and
beneficent. Being, as it was, in the hands of a few
radical clergymen and laymen, it was supposed to be
"infidel" in its character; and was misrepresented
and abused accordingly.

At first, the dissensions of the sects were rebuked.
Afterwards, the scope of the idea was extended; all
the religions of the world being put on an equality
of origin and purpose. The spiritual nature of man
was assumed; the universality of religious feeling;
the inherent tendency to worship, aspiration, prayer,
being taken for granted as an element in the best
minds; all churches and confessions of faith being
looked upon as achievements of the soul; Jesus
-----File: 126.png---\\Paulanni\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
being classed among the leaders of humanity; the
Bible being accepted as a record of spiritual and
moral truth; and the church being regarded as an
organization to diffuse belief. The foundation,
therefore, was a pure Theism, and the effort contemplated
the elevation of all mankind to the dignity
of children of the Highest. That this aim was
always borne in mind is not pretended. The negative
side was made too conspicuous. Now and then
there was a lurch in the direction of denial. There
was too much criticism, and it was not always just.
There was too much speculation, and it was not
always wise. The plan of letting each sect tell its
own story was a little confusing at the start. Still,
on the whole, the object was pretty faithfully kept
in view. Lucretia Mott suggested that the word
"religion" should be substituted for the word
"theology," but the word "religion" was too vague
to afford ground for discussion, and it was felt that
the phrase "scientific" sufficiently explained, through
the substitution of the scientific for the theological
method, the purpose of the association. Moreover,
the purpose was to remove <i>theological</i> differences,
the only differences that existed.

There were names of distinguished men and women
on our list of officers, members, speakers, and friends--Ralph
Waldo Emerson, Amos Bronson Alcott,
Gerrit Smith, George William Curtis, Edward L.
Youmans, Nathaniel Holmes, William Lloyd Garrison,
Wendell Phillips, Rowland G. Hazard, Lucretia
-----File: 127.png---\\Paulanni\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
Mott, Lydia Maria Child, Ednah D. Cheney. Thomas
W. Higginson was one of our most effective speakers;
John Weiss read on our platform his most brilliant
paper on "Science and Religion"; David Atwood
Wasson lent us the light of his countenance.

Our greatest want was the want of a leader,--a
man not only of competent learning and spiritual
enthusiasm, but of natural impulse and vigor; a man
of the people, a man of rugged speech, a man of
vivacity and humor. If Theodore Parker had been
alive he might have taken this position, and distinguished
himself as a leader in this movement; as
it was, there was no one who could take his place,
and the enterprise flagged accordingly, lacking the
popular zeal which would give it currency. The
speculative character of the association was always
against it and rendered it somewhat dry; but this
under the circumstances was inevitable, because we
were forced to deal with technicalities of credence,
and had not power enough to get beyond them into
the universalities of faith.

There was an expectation in many quarters that
the association would devote itself to beneficent projects;
and this was natural, because it seemed as if
those who gave up the bond of belief must adopt
the bond of work. Mr. Emerson seems to have had
a similar desire. "I wish," he said, "that the various
beneficent institutions which are springing up like
joyful plants of wholesomeness all over this country,
should all be remembered as within the sphere of
-----File: 128.png---\\Paulanni\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
this committee,--almost all of them are represented
here,--and that within this little band that has
gathered here to-day should grow friendship." But
in the first place, ours was not a philanthropic institution;
its aim was religious entirely, as it attempted
to substitute the universality of religion for the
one faith of Christendom. The chief workers in
several forms of charity presented their schemes for
our consideration, and at one time it looked as if we
must be borne away into some philanthropic enterprise.
The current, however, which carried us towards
"religious" unity was too strong.

And then, at that time there was little scientific
philanthropy. The word <i>charity</i> was more or less
associated with patronage and pity, the very things
that we wanted to avoid; they who were bent on
wiping out distinctions could not countenance these,
and it was safer not to let our hearts get the better
of our reason. But even if there had been a scientific
treatment of humane questions, we were afraid
of the danger of becoming too much absorbed in
this kind of work, and so of losing sight of our chief
end.

At present the idea of our Association is pretty
well domesticated in Christendom. It was not, after
all, entirely new. In 1845 and 1846 Frederick
Denison Maurice, lecturing on the Boyle Foundation
in London on "The Religions of the World and their
Relations to Christianity," attempted to do justice to
the ancient faiths of India, Persia, Egypt, Greece,
-----File: 129.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
and Rome. In 1882, in Edinburgh, eminent men
discussed the same problems under the title of "The
Faiths of the World." In 1871 James Freeman
Clarke published his "Ten Great Religions." The
study of comparative religion has been going on for
many years. When Mozoomdar came to this country
a few years ago, there was such a rush for him
among American orthodox Christians that the Free
Religious Association could not get at him at all,
though it had tried in vain to get a real Brahmin on
its platform. True, there were differences of opinion
among the orthodox students of the old-world systems.
Some regarded the ancient religions as effete;
some denied that Christianity touched them at more
than one or two points; some treated them simply
as preparations for the crowning faith of Christ.
Still, whatever their differences, all agreed that the
religious instinct was universal; that there was a
ground for revelation in the human heart; since
Carlyle's famous lecture in "Heroes," delivered in
1840, it was impossible to regard Mahomet as an impostor,
or to look upon religion as a fabrication of
the priests, as an attempt to practise upon human
ignorance and fear.

Among the Unitarians our conception is familiar.
At the convention that was held in Philadelphia,
in October, 1889, both parties, the most conservative
and the most radical, sat side by side. A manager
of the Free Religious Association delivered one of
the addresses, and said: "I never believed one tithe
-----File: 130.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
as much as I believe to-night. Never did I have
such faith in God; never did I so believe in man;
never did I see such a glorious outlook for the
Church; never did I hold such a glad theory of human
hope for the future." The secretary of the
American Unitarian Association was full of joy.
The secretary of the Western Unitarian Conference
quoted the opinion of the Western churches, assembled
at Chicago in May, 1887, and declared "our
fellowship to be conditioned on no doctrinal tests,
and welcomes all who wish to join us to help establish
truth and righteousness and love in the world."
A prominent leader of Unitarianism in Illinois
uttered himself thus: "Whatever its traditions,
whatever its present positions, or its prospects, this
spiritual commonwealth is extra-Unitarian, extra-American,
extra-Christian; it is human, and on that
account it is universal, and it is divine." Another
speaker at this convention declared that "the hand
that shall hold this master key is Christ, as the
modern mind conceives him,--Christ healing the
sick, raising the dead, cleansing the leper, casting
out devils from society and business, from politics
and religion; Christ, the friend of Lazarus and of
Mary Magdalen; Christ robed in absolute justice
and also in transcendant love, and embracing the
whole world."

It is not claimed that this extraordinary change in
ecclesiastical fellowship and sympathy is due to the
Free Religious Association. That was one of the
-----File: 131.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
signs of the times, and is an effect rather than a
cause; but it is a sign of the grander unity. When
the portrait of Theodore Parker is hanging on the
walls of Channing Hall; when a cordial welcome is
extended to all seekers for the light; when the East
and West are ready to embrace in a fellowship of
aspiration; when the young men are all alight with
fresh hope and fresh endeavor, we may with confidence
anticipate the time when there shall be but
one fold, and the aim of the Free Religious Association
be met.

The emancipation from denominational trammels
was of great service to the young minister. It is
true that he was still in a "church" which kept him
within ecclesiastical associations; but these fetters
were not heavy, and they were soon to be thrown
off. For in the spring of 1869, the church was sold
to another congregation. This was done partly because
the acoustic properties of the building were
not favorable, and partly because the place was not
suited to the genius of the new society. "There
was no room in the inn," was the subject of the last
sermon preached in that building. Lyric Hall, to
which we removed, is situated on Sixth Avenue,
between 40th and 41st streets. It is a large room
fifty by one hundred feet. During the week it was
used as a dancing hall, but on Sundays it was
arranged for a religious service. A small organ was
placed there, a platform was built, and seats were
brought up from the cellar below. The first sermon
-----File: 132.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
preached there was on "Secular Religion," and it
indicated the whole character of the services. The
most remarkable thing, as regards myself, that happened
in Lyric Hall, was the adoption of the habit
of speaking without notes. The light from the
avenue was too far off for reading, and the speaker
was therefore obliged to dispense with a manuscript
altogether. A theme was first chosen that admitted
of subdivisions, so that as fast as the speaker exhausted
one he could fall back on another. The
habit soon became so familiar that no difficulty was
experienced in handling the most complicated subject.
Here we remained until the spring of 1875,
when we removed to Masonic Temple, on Sixth
Avenue and 23d Street.

This building, which was very large and handsome,
had just been erected by the Masons, who
designed it for their own accommodation. The
structure having cost, however, more than was anticipated,
the owners were obliged, reluctantly, to let
the large hall, which they did for literary and religious
purposes only. We were the first to occupy
it. The hall was spacious and stately, with fixed
seats for about a thousand people. A fine organ
stood at one end of the platform; at the other end
there was a large reception room. The first sermon
there was on "Reasonable Religion." The audience
was never large--never more than eight or nine
hundred, usually six or seven hundred. The form
of service much resembled the form common in
-----File: 133.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
Unitarian churches, with the exception that Mr.
Conway's "Sacred Anthology" was substituted for
the Bible, and the other exercises were more universal
in their character. It had long ceased to be a
Unitarian congregation. There were people of
Catholic training, many of Protestant training, some
of no religious training whatever, materialists, atheists,
secularists, positivists--always thinking people,
with their minds uppermost. It was a church of
the unchurched. George Ripley, the journalist, was
always there; E. C. Stedman, the man of letters;
Calvert Vaux, the architect; Sanford R. Gifford,
the painter; Henry Peters Gray, the artist, was
there until he died; C. P. Cranch, the poet, was
a member of the Society as long as he was in
the city. In the Lyric-Hall days, Judge Geo. C.
Barrett had a seat in the audience. The secular
character was always prominent. When we had a
church on 40th Street, the large basement was used
for music, dramatic performances, readings, festivities,
social gatherings. In Lyric Hall, these were
continued as far as they could be.

The "Fraternity Club" was organized in 1869 by
a devoted member of the Society for the entertainment
and improvement of its members; and drew together
very brilliant minds both within and without
the immediate fellowship. The meetings were held
once in two weeks, when an essay was read, a debate
carried on, and a paper presented; all the performers
being nominated in advance by the President. The
-----File: 134.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
work was mainly done by a few young men, who have
since become eminent in various fields--as teachers,
lawyers, literary critics, publishers,--and by witty
women not a few. There were about seventy members,
each one standing for some peculiar accomplishment.
The subjects of the essays were such as
these, illustrating the breadth of the intellectual
interest: On "Taste"; on "Expressions"; on "The
Coming Man"; on "Wordsworth"; on "The Tree
of Life"; on "Spencer's Britomart as the Type of
Woman"; on "Light and Laughter"; on "Successful
People"; on "Culture"; on "The Cultivation of
the Masses." The subjects for debate were equally
varied: "Ought the sexes to be educated apart?";
"Does a house burn up or burn down?"; "Is the
highest musical culture compatible with the highest
intellectual development?"; "Is there a distinctly
American literature as contrasted with that of
England?"; "Should matrimonial union be contracted
early or late?"; "Ought we to cultivate
most those faculties in which we naturally excel,
or those in which we are naturally deficient?";
"Does increase of culture involve decrease of
amusement?"; "Is the existence of a 'Mute inglorious
Milton' possible?"; "Will giving the franchise
to women exert a beneficial influence on
society?"; "Had you rather be more stupid than
you seem, or seem more stupid than you are?"

The "papers," of which there are some nine volumes
existing, were receptacles for the fancy, ima-*
-----File: 135.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
*gination, sentiment, and humor of the editors or their
co-editors; there were verses, stories, criticisms, jokes,
illustrations, in them; each had its name: "The Bubble,"
"The Venture," "Bric-a-Brac," "Stuff[**,]" "The
Rag-Bag." The club ceased soon after the Society
disbanded, in 1880.

The root idea of the Society, apart from its independence,
was the mingling of the spiritual and the
natural; the domestication of faith. With a view
of making the idea more prevailing and complete, a
children's service in the afternoon was substituted
for the regular Sunday-school. A book was prepared,
"The Child's Book of Religion," by the
pastor, for this express purpose. There were responsive
readings, recitations in unison, songs, and
an address, simple and anecdotical, by the minister.

The Society was never fashionable, or even
popular. At one period--that of the Richardson-McFarland
matter--there was a vast deal of misrepresentation,
criticism, and abuse, but all this had no
effect on the constituency of the parish. There was
the same loyalty, the same interest, the same determination
to sustain a thoroughly liberal ministry, by
which every form of conviction was made conducive
to a purely spiritual faith.

It was never pretended that the Society was anything
more than a beginning. A small and feeble
beginning, but of something that was to grow and
spread; the beginning of a faith that is as rational
as it is wide. Its influence was more diffusive than
-----File: 136.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
concrete as an instituted thing. It is the pride and
consolation of those who began it that they removed
some of the barriers that divided the great brotherhood
of believing men.

My ministry in New York ended in the spring of
1879. Its close was due entirely to my ill-health. A
year before the doctors had warned me not to continue
longer than was necessary my rate of speed. They
urged me to go slower, to "take in sail," and to withdraw
as far as I could from all public demonstrations.
Measures were taken against every emergency,
and I sailed away in the French steamer, with the
hope that in six months I might regain my nervous
power, and return. There was first the exhilarating
sea voyage; then the beautiful city hall of Rouen,
the churches and famous buildings, the square where
Joan of Arc suffered; then came Paris with its enchantments;
after that Basel showed its great Holbeins,
and its lovely promenade overlooking the
river; this led to the celebrated baths at Ragatz
in Switzerland, the placid waters of Pfeffers', the
gorge, the hotel gardens, and the lovely walks; after
this came the pass of the Splgen, the Via Mala,
the hotel at the summit of the pass among the snows,
the pastures, the wild goats; then came Lake Como
in Italy, Bellagio, the charming Villa Serbeloni, looking
down upon the two lakes, Como and Lecco, the
vineyards ripening in the sun, the terraces, looking
across upon the mountains; then Milan opened
its great cathedral, the gallery of the Brera, the
-----File: 137.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
ancient church of Saint Ambrose. Afterwards came
Florence and its heavenly environs, its pictures and
statues and public buildings, its groves and stately
drives and lovely villas; Florence was followed by
Siena, and there I saw the great cathedral, walked
on the esplanade, enjoyed the public square, the
palaces, the pictures of Sodoma. From there I went
to Rome, in December.

It was all in vain; I became satisfied that the
complaint was not of a temporary nature, not owing
to overwork or over-excitement, not easily cured--if
curable at all,--but nervous and hereditary. There-*upon,
I wrote a letter to my trustees absolutely resigning
my office and declining to be a clergyman
any longer, as I could not attempt to renew the
same kind of labor. An attempt was made to secure
a successor; several names were mentioned, and
among men greatly my superiors in learning and
eloquence, but none, it was thought, represented the
precise form of speculation, the exact view of religion
which my friends desired. The Society therefore
was disbanded, and no attempt has been made since
to reorganize it. The members were scattered, some
among other churches, some among other cities,
while some never joined any religious society whatever.
Thus a thriving and growing organization is
now simply a memory.
-----File: 138.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------




X.

THE PROGRESS OF RELIGIOUS THOUGHT IN AMERICA.


An article in the <i>North American Review</i> for
April, 1885, on "Free Thought in America," is
chiefly significant as showing how gradual and tentative
the progress of thought in religion was. The
comments on individuals are often wide of the mark,
but the general drift is quite correct. The course
was shadowy, but the main point was unmistakable.
At this day, the wholesale abuse of religion is harmless,
and can exert no wide influence. The friends of
liberal thought are against it; and those who seek
the old grim conclusion do so in another way,
striving to substitute a new faith in nature for the
old faith in divine inspiration, and to prove the
latter to have been a growth rather than an imposition.
The study of comparative religions has put a
new face on the question, and the concern is now to
discover the source of faith in the supernatural and
not to make it appear a creation of priestcraft. No
sooner had serious investigations into antiquity become
known, than the method pursued by Voltaire
and Dupuis was abandoned, and each generation
-----File: 139.png---\\TravellersJoy\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------
since has confirmed the facts of historic development.

That my own immediate predecessors were Emerson
and Parker is most true. With the writings of
the former I was familiar; the latter was my intimate
friend. Perhaps my theological views are due
to him more than to any other man, though the circumstances
of his generation were peculiar, and
determined, in a much greater degree than in my own
case was possible, the cast of his thought. The Unitarian
controversy, in which he played so prominent
a part, and by stress whereof he was driven into
some of his positions, is over. The anti-slavery
struggle, into which he threw himself and as a result
of which his religious antagonisms were sharpened,
was ended many years ago.

Poe said in the preface to "Eureka," that perfect
beauty was a guaranty of perfect truth; so I felt--felt
rather than reasoned--that a great character
was sufficient proof of the truth of doctrine, and I
accepted the teaching on the strength of the nobleness
which was before my eyes. Later researches
confirmed my opinions, but while I was under
Parker's influence, his theological views were accepted
without much consideration; his unique style
of personality laying my heart as it were under a
spell.

Emerson was a man of colder temperament, thinner
of blood, more spare in frame; of finer intellectual
fibre, of more commanding intellectual supremacy;
-----File: 140.png---\\TravellersJoy\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------
not a combatant on any field; a sweet, gracious,
shadowy personality; calm, lucid, imperturbable;
pursuing knowledge along the spiritual path of
pure thought, although he was also a student of
books; a regenerator of mind rather than a reformer
of customs; a prophet, distinguished for penetration
rather than for will. His ideas were substantially
the same as Parker's, but he did not arrive at them
in the same way, or hold them in the same spirit,
or apply them with the same directness. He carried
them out further, not being hindered, as his
contemporary was, by the immediate necessities of
the hour. In short, he was another sort of man
entirely. Both were transcendentalists, but Parker
shaped his philosophy to the working exigencies of
his generation, while Emerson let his stream freely
in the air. The writer of the article in question
accuses Emerson of want of pathos, and declares
that this was the lack of the transcendentalists, as a
school. But he could hardly charge this on Parker,
who was an ardent transcendentalist, but whose
very language was vascular, who affected multitudes
of men and women, and who held audiences by the
heartstrings. Did Hopkins or Bellamy or Edwards
melt people? Were the preachers of Calvinism
priests of sorrow? This is a matter of temperament
and not of creed. Extreme rationalists leave their
congregations in tears, and extreme churchmen dismiss
theirs unmoved, the humors of the men deciding
the issues of their ministrations. The closer to
-----File: 141.png---\\TravellersJoy\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------
the ground, the more abundant the sympathy. The
question is whether one is more mundane or more
ethereal by native gift and endowment.

That transcendentalism was mainly speculative
may be doubted, but if it was so this may be accounted
an incidental circumstance to be explained
by the prevailing theological temper of the age, and
the duty imposed on it of transferring the body of
doctrine to an ideal realm; a task which demands
an intellectual effort of no common magnitude. And
when with this task was joined the endeavor to
sift out the purely spiritual ideas from the mass of
dogmatical and ecclesiastical error, it is no wonder
that it should have been speculative in its tendency.
Certainly, Brook Farm was concrete enough, and
the transcendentalists were, as a rule, interested in
social reconstruction, though not in a way to touch
popular emotion. One cannot, even at this distance,
think of the quickening radiance shed by the transcendentalists
over the whole region of religious
belief and duty, without gratitude. The hymns, the
sermons, the music, the Sunday-schools, the prayers,
the charities, the social ministrations, breathed forth
a fresh spirit. If there were fewer tears of woe,
there was more weeping for joy. There was too
much gladness for crying. Life was made sunny.
Human nature was interpreted cheerfully. There
was an unlimited future for misery, ignorance, turpitude.
Sin was remanded to the position of crudity,
and was banished from the heavenly courts.
-----File: 142.png---\\TravellersJoy\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------
Violence was protested against in laws, customs,
manners, speech. Harsh doctrines were criticised.
Austere views were discarded. Intellectual barriers
were removed. Spiritual channels were deepened
and widened. Light was let into dark places. The
brightest aspects of divinity were presented. Immortality
was rendered native to the soul. The life
below was regarded as the portal to the life above.

In my own case, whatever of enthusiasm I may
have had, whatever transports of feeling, whatever
glow of hope for mankind, whatever ardor of anticipation
for the future, whatever exhilaration of mind
towards God, whatever elation in the presence of
disbelief in the popular theology, may be fairly
ascribed to this form of the ideal philosophy. It
was like a revelation of glory. Every good thought
was encouraged. Every noble impulse was heightened.
It was balm and elixir to me. If transcendentalism
did not appear as a sun illuminating
the entire mental universe it was the fault of my
exposition alone. Absolute faith in that form of
philosophy grew weak and passed away many
years since, and the assurance it gave was shaken;
but the sunset flush continued a long time after
the orb of day had disappeared and lighted up the
earth. Gradually the splendor faded, to be succeeded
by a softer and more tranquil gleam, less
stimulating but not less beautiful or glorious. The
world looks larger under the light of stars. I always
loved Blanco White's magnificent sonnet to Night,
-----File: 143.png---\\Paulanni\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
but never appreciated its full significance until the
scientific view had succeeded to the transcendental,
and I began to walk by knowledge, steadily and
surely, but not buoyantly any more. It would be a
mistake to suppose that anything like pain, sadness,
or sterility accompanies the departure of an old
faith, when a new one takes its place and soon opens
fresh prospects of good. The universe but grows
larger: other methods are adopted, other hopes are
entertained, other consolations are presented, and
soon the mind adjusts itself to the altered conditions.
The downcast mood of George Eliot, of the author
of "Physicus," and of many another less distinguished
unbeliever, may be due in part to temperament, in
part to the first feeling of chill that ensues upon a
transitional period, which brings in a different
climate; but the allegation of lasting coldness, gloom,
discontent, is wholly groundless. The old fable
says that quails drop from the clouds, that even rocks
quench the traveller's thirst. There is, in short, no
wilderness.

That the creed was "filmy," the foothold "unsteady,"
is altogether likely, for the ancient supports
were removed, the pillars that replaced them were
shaking, and tradition alone remained to hold by.
But religion was still the Poetry of Life, and kept
its place among the interests singly represented by
art, music, literature, philosophy, those fine intimations
of a higher state, those splendid foreshadowings
of the future, those noble efforts to solve
-----File: 144.png---\\Paulanni\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
problems that must be forever insoluble. My creed
did not pretend to be final or even definite. It was
simply a study, a preliminary sketch, an essay towards
truth. A claim to completeness, to logical
consistency, would have been fatal. Still less, if possible,
did it pretend to meet popular wants. It
resolutely turned in the opposite direction, and took
up positions which, it was understood, the general
public could not occupy without abandoning all its
works and retiring to other ground. No effort was
made to commend it to common opinion; on the
contrary, everything like concession was shunned,
and the slightest signal of agreement with current
beliefs was regarded as a warning against a compromise
of principle. Nothing was assumed except the
validity of the human faculties, including, of course,
the higher reason, the insight of genius, and such
feelings as were parts of the rational constitution,
together with perfect liberty in their exercise. Every
theological system was repudiated; even the doctrines
of a conscious Deity and the individual immortality
of the soul were left open to discussion,
the atheist and the materialist being listened to with
as much deference as any. These doctrines were
accepted, yet not on the ground of authority or tradition,
but simply considered as faiths, hopes, sentiments
of the spiritual being; the existence of living
mind, coupled with the demand for unity, seeming
to guarantee the first, the fact of individual persistency
appearing to demonstrate the second. But
-----File: 145.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
all definition was carefully avoided, conviction being
confined to the main idea, and being purely spiritual
in its character, not in the least dogmatical, or exclusive
of knowledge. Of doctrine in the usual sense
there was none. There was merely thought. The
very teaching was more of the nature of suggestion
than of final conclusion. For this reason no account
of the "credo" can be given, all fixed expressions
of views being discountenanced as premature, and
therefore irrational. This should be distinctly understood
by those interested in coming at the truth
on this subject. The object was to disintegrate, to
pulverize, to enable mind to float freely in the air of
intellect, to the end that it might crystallize about
natural centres. All dogmatism, that of the infidel
as well as that of the believer, of the man of science
as well as of the theologian, of the sensualist as well
as of the spiritualist, was obnoxious. There was no
sympathy with those who regarded the case as
closed, either as the anti-Christian assailant or as the
apologist did; either with the school of Paine or
with the school of Calvin. Hereafter there may be
articles of belief, at present there can be none. This,
it may be said, was a temporary, incidental position,
quite indeterminate and unsatisfactory. No doubt
it was. That was all it pretended to be. The sooner
it disappeared and was succeeded by a more stable
one, so it was reasonable, the better, for that would
indicate an advance in rational judgment.

This task--the complete emancipation of the hu-*
-----File: 146.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
*man mind from every form of thraldom--will occupy
liberal teachers for a long time to come. All
that can be said in defence of instituted religion, and
all that can be urged on the other side, had been put
forward again and again, but in a sectarian--that is,
in a partisan--spirit. Now an even temper is demanded.
Unfortunately, impartiality is apt to degenerate
into indifference. Breadth of view is, as a rule,
inconsistent with rapidity of motion. The fact that
the Free Religious Association had a small constituency
as compared with many an orthodox society is
no evidence whatever that the orthodox society is
nearer the truth. The former was broad enough
to admit all religions, the latter shut out all save the
Christians, thus making them a special community
saved by their belief. The problem is to preserve
and, if possible, deepen intellectual enthusiasm while
opposing fanatical adherence to dogmas; to associate
breadth with force, to unite freedom with earnestness,
and to render the love of truth more intense in
proportion as the horizon recedes and ideas multiply.
Such ought to be the result of free thinking, and
such it is when <i>thinking</i> goes hand in hand with
<i>freedom</i>.

Critical studies must keep an even pace with philosophy,
and both must conspire to push back the
lines of credence as far as faith in the spiritual sentiment
will permit. The latest investigations have
substantiated liberal conclusions and carried them
into regions which were inaccessible to the authori-*
-----File: 147.png---\\Antigony\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
*ties of an early day. A certain amount of denial
was necessary of course, but this was made in view
of a larger affirmation which had to be brought forward,
and was, moreover, confined to matters incidental,
not directed at the substance of faith. The
assumption of a spiritual nature in man guaranteed
the inherent genuineness of all aspiration.

No doubt the assumption of a creative religious
nature in man lent aid to the endeavor to glorify the
pagan faiths, and predisposed the mind to accept
criticisms on Christianity; but scientific investigation
of the world's bibles went on quite independently of
this assumption. It was promoted by Catholics and
Protestants, by Lutherans and Unitarians, by Germans,
French, English, Americans. Certainly the
alleged antiquity of a system is not in its favor; for
ignorance, credulity, superstition, are much older
than this; older than the ancient books, than the
ancient thinkers. The oldest things are errors, delusions,
falsities. The allegiance of great minds simply
proves the limitations of intellect. Sir Thomas
More believed in transubstantiation, and Samuel
Johnson believed in ghosts. The wide reverence for
the Scriptures is an impressive fact, until it is seen
that no writings have been so guarded, nor have such
pains been taken in regard to any other literature to
create for it a habit of docile veneration. Fidelity
is praiseworthy, but it is no pledge of wisdom. On
the contrary it draws attention to the merits or demerits
of the creed to which it is consecrated. Is
-----File: 148.png---\\Antigony\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
witchcraft respectable? Yet it had its martyrs. Is
demoniacal possession credible? Yet saints attested
it. The fury of the fighter cannot vouch for the
worthiness of the cause. If it could, the narrowest
credence would be the truest as the world goes, and
they who adhere to the "Christian" tradition would
be consigned to the darkest cells of it. The newest
thing is knowledge. This never paralyzes, and
never is fanatical. Its heat is stimulating yet gracious.
Its zeal does not scorch or consume. It
awakens every faculty, keeps inquiry on the stretch,
excites the noblest ambition, and at the same time
rebukes the partisan temper in all its manifestations.
Its reign is beneficent; its coming is full of hope.
It is ever looking forward with sanguine anticipation,
and if it is at times impatient, petulant, or imperious,
it is because it is fretted by stubborn
obstacles that prevent the full realization of its purpose
to discover the truth. For a long time to come
there will be controversy, but its violence will disappear,
its acrimony will gradually cease, the passion
for victory will yield to the love of knowledge, and
all genuine seekers will unite in the search after
light.

In the last generation the progress of intelligent
examination into nature's secrets has been exceedingly
rapid. During my active ministry I was
hardly aware of it, for though an assailant of the
popular religion, a champion of the freest thought, I
was a defender of the current religious ideas; since
-----File: 149.png---\\Antigony\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
leaving the profession, the significance of the mental
revolution that is taking place, has been more fully
revealed to me. The advance has approached very
near to the heart of the citadel. The questions
under discussion are fundamental ones, the existence
of a self-conscious deity, the fact of personal continuance
beyond the grave, the line of distinction
between "material" and "spiritual" things. The
dispute hangs on invisible threads of logic. The
conservatives occupy positions which radicals of
thirty years back could not assume.

The next step in the development of free thought
must be toward the realization of all the ideal
supports of mankind, the spiritualizing of the secular,
the lifting into heavenly places of this world's
activity, the transfiguration of our common life. If
by religion is understood the striving after perfection
in intellectual things by the untrammelled pursuit of
knowledge, in social concerns by the exercise of
fraternal kindness, in the spiritual world by aspiration
towards a complete surrender to natural law,
every free thinker will encourage that and will do
what he can to promote it. That there is no final
truth discoverable must be admitted, but such a
confession need not trouble those who look manfully
forward to a future of new discoveries, and gird
themselves to remove all obstacles to the knowledge
of the world they live in.

Robert Browning in his "Paracelsus," published in
1835, anticipates the doctrine of evolution.
-----File: 150.png---\\Antigony\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------

/*
          Thus He dwells in all,
From life's minute beginnings, up at last
To man--the consummation of this scheme
Of being--the completion of this sphere
Of life; whose attributes had here and there
Been scattered o'er the visible world before,
Asking to be combined.
*/

In 1836, Emerson in his "Nature," reiterated this
grand prophecy:

/*
A subtle chain of countless rings,
The next unto the farthest brings,
The eye reads omens where it goes,
And speaks all languages, the rose;
And striving to be man, the worm
Mounts through all the spires of form.
*/

In 1867, science had gone so far that it could
announce the Unity of Creation; the absolute Order
and Law; one continuous Force; Progress as the end
of life. The eternal beauty existed for those who
had eyes to see. On this foundation the human heart,
with its qualities of mercy, pity, peace, and love, its
sentiments of justice and equity, its hunger for
advance, its idea of goodness, built up a very noble
and benignant conception of deity and the sure hope
of moral perfection.
-----File: 151.png---\\Norilan\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------




XI.


THE CLERICAL PROFESSION.


It is natural that the clerical profession should be
an order by itself. Every other calling is--the lawyer's,
the physician's, the artist's and the merchant's.
There is an absurd notion that the clerical profession
stands alone; that it has a supernatural origin, which
takes it out of the circle of ordinary employments;
that it is not to be compared with other institutions
of society. But the real dignity of the profession
consists in its filling its place among human arrangements.
A certain temperament too, seems to belong
to all employments. There is the legal temperament,
the artistic, the dramatic, the mercantile. It
is no disadvantage that one prefers solitude, likes
abstract thoughts, has no taste for business enterprise,
is fond of books and study. Indeed, this is an
advantage for one whose office it is to amass learning,
to weigh opinions in fine scales, to follow the
spiritual laws, and to peer into the mystery that
surrounds human life. The very misunderstandings,
illusions, superstitions that gather around the
calling may be recommendations, inasmuch as they
-----File: 152.png---\\Norilan\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------
prevent the intrusion of rude minds, and draw their
attention towards subjects they would not otherwise
be interested in.

A certain amount of positiveness is necessary to
ensure the worth of the profession. The Catholic
priest has no doubt whatever of the providential
establishment of the church in which he is a servant.
This must be beyond question or misgiving. This is
taken for granted by clergy and laity. All learning
must be made to confirm it, all observation is compelled
to favor it. The laws of society must have
nothing to do with the kingdom of God; for society
is to be redeemed, nature is to be supplanted by
grace, secular life must therefore be excluded. The
priest, such is the theory, dwells out of the world,
and is encouraged to do so. He is poor, celibate,
homeless, has no attachments, no affections, no terrestrial
occupations. He must be to all intents and
purposes dead to mortal affairs. One may find fault
with earthly institutions; one is bound to find fault
with them, but the church must be beyond criticism
and must be accepted as a gift from heaven.

The Protestant clergyman holds fast by his doctrine
of faith as by divine appointment. His chief
tenets must not be submitted to doubt. Whatever
he may reject, there remains something he is not
tempted to resign--namely, the presence of the Holy
Spirit in his creed. Reason may carry the outworks--ceremonies,
ordinances, incidental points of belief,--but
the citadel is removed from assault. The world-*
-----File: 153.png---\\Norilan\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------
*spirit may hover around him, envious, expectant,
watchful, applauding his boldness, cheering his
progress towards negations, glad to see the gulf
betwixt him and the age gradually diminishing, and
pressing into every vacant position; society may
claim interest in him more and more; but there are
points he must not yield, and which he merely
wishes to bring into prominence in surrendering
others which he regards as secondary. So much
may be necessary, but religion must practically take
its place among the ideal pursuits of men and be exposed,
as they are, to the full examination of the
mind before any fair account of it can be given.
And this cannot be so long as a region, however
small, is shut off from investigation by supernatural
powers.

Moreover, it is the common impression that the
office of the ministry is detrimental to the best
interest of humanity, because it establishes another
caste and thus destroys the unity that is so important
in the integrity of the world. By it the priest
is a person set apart, hedged about by the laws, held
in peculiar reverence, habited in special garments.
Some kinds of entertainments, such as dancing, the
drama, are commonly forbidden to him. His presence
on festive occasions used to be regarded as a
gracious intrusion. He was not expected to take
part in gayeties or to have any share in frivolities,
which were much more hilarious when he was absent
and the restraint of his presence was removed. He
-----File: 154.png---\\Norilan\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------
was thought to be somehow at war with nature, and
his looking on at merrymaking was regarded by the
polite as a piece of condescension on his part, an
evidence of unusual liberality of sentiment. It was
but the other day that a young physician, belonging
to a Unitarian family, and himself an enthusiastic
student of science, praised a minister for excusing
his continual absence from church on the ground of
his being so well employed. This was regarded as
a long step in the direction of indulgence towards
natural inclination. Even among rationalists, a
symptom of the old idea appears in an expression of
the face, the manner of address, the walk, or the
general bearing. It is thought a great stretch of
charity if he is kind to the atheist, the materialist,
the infidel; and to take in the tempted child of
nature, the drunkard, the victim of lust, avarice, is
extreme good-will, benevolence amounting to saintliness.
To abolish from it the pretension of superiority
in the form of pity, as the high look upon the
low, the good upon the bad, the moral upon the immoral,
the virtuous upon the vicious, is, it is presumed,
to overlook all recognized distinctions, to
enthrone nature, to accept instinct as a safe guide,
to renounce religion altogether and reject the saying
that "the Christian church is immortal because its
fundamental dogma involves a doctrine of God in
nature so ample and clear as to satisfy every profoundest
want of the heart and every urgent demand
of the head towards God forever."
-----File: 155.png---\\Norilan\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------

There are distinctions enough among men at any
rate, and to obliterate them as far as possible is the
office of true religion and all real humanity; to increase
love, to multiply the bonds of fraternity, to
bring mankind to a social equality, to annihilate all
that keeps mortals apart. Of course the safety of
society must be preserved by laws, customs, prejudices,
but care should be taken to make these simply
protective in their function, and in no event should
it be assumed that such distinctions, however radical,
have any absolute value or go beyond the limits of
this outward world. Save men, if you can, from
intemperance, violence, covetousness, lasciviousness,
cowardice, gluttony, laziness, from every vice that
brutalizes them, renders them objects of hate, fear,
suspicion, or jealousy; make their circumstances
wholesome, their condition in life invigorating, but
do it in the name of enlightenment, do it as members
of the human brotherhood, not as members of a
divine organization. Many ministers make great
efforts to exorcise this demon of exclusiveness, but
the effort is too severe for any but the few, and the
success of it is of doubtful accomplishment.

The Christian minister is a representative of humanity,
pure and simple, without recognition of its
division into classes. He is neither rich nor poor,
high nor low, in society nor out of it, elevated nor
obscure. He is democratic, the friend of everybody,
the servant of all, on terms of charity and sincerity
with all men. Sectarianism, with its manifold evils
-----File: 156.png---\\Norilan\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------
of violence, malignity, hatred, misrepresentation, is a
standing evidence of the harm done to society by a
priesthood, whether Catholic or Protestant, and ministers
who have labored to overthrow its influence as
being fatal to charity have been obliged to fight
against the spirit of party, and to rely more upon
their natural disposition than upon their professional
training. In this respect the laity have been in advance
of their so-called leaders. The people have
always been opposed to dogmatical exclusiveness,
and have welcomed every sign of generosity towards
unbelievers. They have followed their instinct of
sympathy, they have read the New Testament by
the light of their human feeling, and setting common-sense
against doctrinal narrowness, have rejoiced at
every victory gained over intolerance. They have
been friends of brotherhood; they have adopted the
cause of liberty; and I must own with grief, the
foes they have had to contend with have been, in
too many instances, the ministers who would not see
that charity was before faith.

Everybody must have observed the unanimity and
the persistency with which ministers of all denominations
and of all ages have devoted themselves to
the rich. In fact the devotion is so conspicuous
that it is one of the commonplace criticisms on the
profession. People in general assume that this kind
of adulation, amounting often to toadyism, is characteristic
of the clerical calling, so inseparable from it
indeed that the majority of men are incredulous as
-----File: 157.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
to any departure from it, and look with unfeigned
admiration, when there are no reasons for distrust,
on the minister who knows no distinction of persons
or conditions, but has regard to intellectual or spiritual
considerations alone. Such a man is viewed as
a wonder, an exception to all rules, singularly constituted,
either extraordinarily humane or extraordinarily
obtuse, either more or less than a man. The
worship of wealth is so common that some explanation
of it must be given. The sufferings, mishaps,
troubles of the rich are reputed to be more serious
than they are in the ordinary run of cases; their
disappointments are more pitiable, their crosses
heavier, their losses severer, their sorrows a graver
imputation on Providence. They are looked on as
the favorites of heaven, and the cotton-wool in which
they are wrapped is spoken of as the provision that
is made for them expressly by the Lord.

This may be accounted for on grounds of material
convenience. They who have money are of great
importance, and that they should be interested in
church affairs is of immense moment to all concerned,
not to the ministers alone, but to the entire
congregation, nay, to the whole community of believing
men. There is always need of money, to build
churches, pay officials, hire singers, furnish ornaments,
support charities, maintain organizations for
various ecclesiastical purposes; and it is much easier
to get this in larger sums and with little trouble,
than to obtain it in little driblets, with much pain,
-----File: 158.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
great expenditure of time, and constant vexation of
spirit. The minister, from the nature of the case, is
chargeable with this concern, which obliges him to
visit frequently the wealthier members of his sect.
To this end he must keep on good terms with them,
must sit at their tables, eat their dinners, drink their
wine, praise their pictures, compliment their tastes,
commend their performances, flatter their self-esteem,
admire their surroundings, take their side in controversy;
and all such conduct is set down by kindly,
thoughtful people, to the account of prudence which
is more than pardonable in one situated as he is.

This is quite true, but it is not the whole truth.
By implication already, the duty of cultivating the
rich as donors involves the qualities of manhood
to an indefinite extent. The line of necessary courtesy
is not decisively drawn; cannot be drawn by
the rules of etiquette. This must be the result of a
trained experience, of a delicacy and sensitiveness, of
a pride of selfhood, of a loftiness or dignity of
mind that are hardly to be looked for in any large
class of human beings, however free from special
temptation or particular seductions that may be.
The influence of luxury, ease, comfort, elegance, is
very insidious, so that even an unusual zeal for
truth, an extraordinary passion for excellence, yields
to the power of moral indifference, of intellectual
superficialness, which is characteristic of those who
do not do battle with circumstances. It is so much
easier to do nothing than it is to do something; it is
-----File: 159.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
so charming to be deferred to, to be looked up to, to
be flattered, to have one's opinion sought without
being involved in discussion, or vexed by opposition,
or confronted with scepticism; it is so delightful
to the natural man to sit in an easy cushioned chair,
and be treated with delicate courtesy and dainty
refinement as an authority on matters theological,
philosophical, literary, instead of being put on the
defensive by keen questioners who submit awkward
problems for immediate solution; it is so gratifying
to one's self-esteem to be received as a superior
being, that ordinary human nature generally succumbs
to the temptation and finds ready excuse for
acquiescence in the necessity of being on good terms
with one's wealthier parishioners, and so securing
their all important good-will. In short, a fastidious
kind of flunkeyism is engendered that is quite inconsistent
with the spiritual life. The rich become
a refuge as well as a resource, and the inner man is
weakened while the outer man is confirmed. A
species of lethargy creeps over mind and conscience.
Even the moral purpose faints and languishes, and
charity ceases to be athletic, as elegance of form is
substituted for pith of resolution. The prophet is
induced to say smooth things, to announce easy
principles, to gloze over hard interpretations, to keep
out of sight unwelcomed truths; and extraordinary
courage is required of those who would resist this
tendency to complaisance. The rich are, from the
nature of the case, easily persuaded of the excel-*
-----File: 160.png---\\Paulanni\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
*lence of existing institutions, ideas, observances. I
had been in the pulpit five years before I saw Henry
James' remarkable lecture on "Property as a Symbol,"
and learned for the first time that "Property
symbolizes the perfect sovereignty which man is
destined to exercise over nature"; that "Property
as an institution of human society expresses or
grows out of this instinct of sovereignty in man.
While this instinct is as yet misunderstood or unrecognized
by the individual, while its full issues
are as yet unimagined by him, society lends all her
force to educate it under this form of an aspiration
after property, or a desire to appropriate to one's self,
land, houses, money, precious stones, and whatsoever
else evidences one's power over nature ...
Thus the moral law is nothing more or less than an
affirmation of the sacredness of private property. It
virtually asserts an individuality in man superior to
that conferred by his nature ... Such is the
temper of mind which God begets in him, to subdue
the whole realm of the outward and finite to himself,
to the service of his proper individuality, and so
vindicate the truth of his infinite origin ...
The sole ground of our sovereignty over nature is
inward, consisting in a God-inspired selfhood, instinct
with infinite power."

It would be comforting to believe that a felt consciousness
of this infinitude, however dim, animates
the attachment of the clergyman to the opulent of
any congregation; but I, for one, must make the
-----File: 161.png---\\Paulanni\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
confession that the fact of property was taken
literally, that the ideal, symbolical character of it
was concealed, that the instinct of sovereignty was
unrecognized and unimaginable, and that the divine
intent was unsought for, the institution being held
quite sufficient to itself and needing no authentication
beyond its existence. And such, I apprehend,
is the prevailing view among the clergy, whose
worship of it is not identical with the adoration of
the Infinite.

One cannot undertake to speak with knowledge
on a subject so complicated as this is with private
motives, personal temperaments, social circumstances;
but, as far as my memory goes, the clergy, as a class,
have been too much engaged with matters ecclesiastical
to be deeply interested in any cause of reform,
and too timid to take the initiative in any matter
involving disagreeable relations with controlling
powers.

While towards the rich the attitude of the clergy
is one of allegiance, towards the poor it has been
one of patronage. This is a danger. "The poor ye
have always with you, and whenever ye will ye can
do them good," expresses their doctrine of charity.
As if the poor were created in order that others
might exercise beneficence; as if poverty was a
providential institution, maintained in the interest
of religion! It is hard in a so-called "Christian"
community to get away from this view. The modern
scientific theory and the "Christian" theory are thus
-----File: 162.png---\\Paulanni\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
at war; the former being intent on the well-being
of society, the latter having in mind the cultivation
of the individual in tenderness of sympathy; the
former educating intelligence, the latter educating
feeling. Still there was charity.

The Catholic Church, to say nothing here of any
ecclesiastical purpose in keeping masses of men and
women out of the world, gathered those who could
not help themselves into great buildings and took
care of them. In the Protestant Church the care of
the poor has been held to be a religious duty, and a
large part of the efforts of Christian ministers is
directed to the fostering of pity and generosity in
the hearts of the wealthy. To give to those who
had nothing was reckoned the chief of graces, and
"charity"--interpreted as love for those in want--was
placed above "faith" and "hope," even when
money alone was given. Not long ago a Unitarian
minister exhorted his congregation to set apart for
the uses of the poor one tenth part of their annual
income, and doubtless he had the consciences of
nearly all his hearers with him, for the monstrous
proposition has been so often asserted as to seem by
this time a commonplace. Probably no man living
does that or ever did, and the practice of it on a
large scale would pauperize the community. Think
of it! Five thousand dollars a year is not a great
income, yet if every one who had as much bestowed
a tenth part of it on charitable objects what a fund
for human demoralization would be raised! And
-----File: 163.png---\\lorac211\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
when the income is ten thousand, fifteen thousand,
twenty thousand, the amount of imbecility created
would be indescribable; inertia would be frightfully
increased, and multitudes would sit with folded
hands who otherwise would have lifted them to do
some honest work. A moral lethargy would fall on
the toiling masses; wealth-producing labor would
shrink to narrower and narrower limits, and a
paralysis of energy would steal over the will of
those whose need of resolution is the sorest. Wealth
would consequently decrease, and the number of the
givers get smaller and smaller until accumulation,
which is the life of the modern world as distinguished
from the ancient, would be blighted. The industrial
classes would be reduced to servitude, enormous
fortunes would be gathered by fraud, speculation,
cruelty, and progressive society would relapse into
sterility. Fortunately the minister could not persuade
people to adopt this fatal policy. Fortunately,
in this particular, niggardliness went hand in hand
with common-sense.

That the churches, under the lead of the ministers,
have done a vast deal in the direction of charity, so
far from being denied or disputed, is cordially
allowed and even maintained. Indeed, this has been
their chief function, and they have discharged it
with immense zeal and astonishing results.

But that it was an "ideal" profession is, as I said,
a recommendation to the ministry. It is a broad
foundation for spiritual-mindedness, for unworldli-*
-----File: 164.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
*ness. True, the habit of dealing with abstract topics,
of holding commerce with purely speculative themes,
of entertaining mere theories which cannot be verified,
of going back to what are called "first principles,"
imparts a curiously vague, dreamy, impersonal,
impalpable character to the minister's intellect, rendering
it unfit to treat concrete questions of life or
morals; for this reason he is not often successful as
a man of business, a practical politician, a manager
of affairs, his cast of mind disqualifying him for
close consideration of details.

The duty of answering unanswerable questions,
too, of solving problems that are insoluble, of replying
positively to what, from the nature of things, he
cannot know, gives him a kind of ingenuity which
is not genuine insight, but consists in subtle turnings,
windings, in making fine distinctions and splitting
hairs, and inventing ingenious interpretations, rather
than in keen insight or straightforward analysis. He
must seek ways of escape from his pursuers, and,
when no other offers, hide in the thicket of mystery
or run up the tree of faith. He must, if possible,
have an explanation ready, and, if he has none, he
must fall back on authority, and be impressive,
addressing the sentiment of awe which is usually
alive in every bosom, or, in the last resort, asseverating
the truth of revelation, and thus silencing
the debate he cannot continue. If neither conscience
is satisfied, his own or his interlocutor's, there is no
remedy save in submission. He makes no attempt
-----File: 165.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
to clear up his conceptions, or, if he does, ends
at last in vacuity or discontent. His neighbor,
unconvinced, concludes that this is a clerical subterfuge,
and so far loses confidence in a profession he
cannot understand. Probably he does not do it
justice, but the effect is the same,--a rooted depreciation
such as would not be felt towards a layman
who simply said that he had no answer.

The minister, also, is generally committed to a
conception of the universe as a product of the
Supreme Will which, makes him an apologist. He
is, after a fashion, in the secret of God. He is
supposed to deliver messages and to utter oracles.
His is the wisdom of the Eternal. His is the Bible.
His are the testimonies. He must follow the ways
of the Spirit and defend the divine economy in the
constitution of the world. But in each case, every
allowance being made for indefiniteness, for largeness
of statement and broadness of exposition, the
minister must be a champion of the Infinite Wisdom
and Goodness, pledged to maintain it against all
opponents; and however cordially he may choose
that part, the consciousness of being bound may act
as a fretting annoyance, not to say a galling restraint.

A singular dogmatism often accompanies this
claim to speak in the name of the Almighty; the
minister must enunciate truths, not deliver opinions.
An authoritative tone gets into his voice, pervades
his manner, affects his whole expression of face,
is conveyed by his gait and walk, so that he is
-----File: 166.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
known at once from afar. Men hush their voices
in his presence, ventilate thoughts not natural to
them, conceal their actual sentiments, from a feeling
that he is to be deferred to, not argued with like
another man. The tone of the pulpit animates his
conversation and works into the very structure of
his thought. He is always a preacher. The atmosphere
of Sunday hangs about him. He carries the
New Testament into the parlor; unconsciously to
himself he uses the language of authority, and finds
to his mortification that he is angered by dispute.

The duty of administering consolation to the
afflicted adds to this visionary frame of mind. Frequent
intercourse with the suffering, sad, and bereaved,
intimate commerce with sick-beds and graves,
besides creating ghostly dispositions, deepens his
cast of thought. To comfort people under disappointments,
to smooth the rugged path, to quiet the
perturbed heart, is a business to discharge which all
the resources of faith are called into requisition, and
any means that will accomplish the end in view are
considered as justifiable. In the effort to find comfortable
things to say, the temptation to say pleasant
things, easy things, amiable things, to present the
kindly aspect of Providence, and to indulge happy
fancies in regard to human allotments and destiny,
is exceedingly strong; so that one may come at last
to believe himself what gives so much contentment
to others in the severe crises of existence. The loving
heart is in perilous proximity to the thinking
-----File: 167.png---\\Paulanni\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
head. All the sweetest feelings of our nature, the
wish to console people, to make them patient, trusting,
resigned, cheerful, are brought in to reinforce
the faith in a benignant purpose on the part of the
Creator, and an unquestioning disposition is encouraged
in the spiritual physician as well as in the
stricken patient.

Mr. Henry James says ("Substance and Shadow,"
p. 214): "Protestant men and women, those who
have any official or social consequence in the church,
are apt to exhibit a high-flown religious pride, a
spiritual flatulence and sourness of stomach which
you do not find under the Catholic administration."
This is strong language, but not too strong considering
the author's abhorrence of exclusiveness, separation,
Pharisaism, and his identification of this with
official religion.

If humility is the base of all the virtues, as it is
commonly reported, then a profession that directly
favors pride is not productive of the highest type of
character. And if love,--kindness, brotherhood, fellowship,--is
the fulfilment of the law, then a calling
that puts desire in conflict with duty is not conducive
to unity or peace, whether in the private mind
or in the collective household. Character, as <i>naturally</i>
interpreted, consists of an innate superiority to
one's fellow-men in the qualities that glorify humanity,
purity, heavenly-mindedness, patience, earnestness,
truthfulness, sincerity. Character, as <i>spiritually</i>
interpreted, consists of the cordial affiliation with
-----File: 168.png---\\Paulanni\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
one's fellow-men in the qualities that unite the atoms
of humanity in love, compassion, humility, forgiveness,
sympathy. But the higher view has not prevailed
in my experience; let me repeat, in the most
emphatic language at my command, my conviction
that ministers as a body do not succumb to the temptations
thus apparently incident to their profession.

It is commonly supposed that the intellectual part
of the minister's labor--the making of the sermons--is
most severe. It is imagined that the task of
addressing the same audience every Sunday must be
exceedingly arduous. This is a mistake. There is
a facility of work in every profession. The mind
becomes accustomed to running in certain grooves,
to going through the same process of thinking, to
applying the same rules to many details of practice.
The longer one's continuance in the ministry, the
easier this becomes. Experience accumulates. Themes
multiply. Novel suggestions occur. New thoughts
arise. Fresh books are written. Singular questions
are proposed. Problems present fresh aspects. The
old interests remain in all their force. Men never
tire hearing about God, Immortality, Destiny. In
truth, the intellectual difficulties become less and less
appalling until at last they disappear. The real
effort is to keep alive the feelings of humanity; to
overcome the inclination towards separation into
classes; to avoid distinguishing between persons; to
keep love glowing; to maintain the supremacy of
soul; to identify spirituality with custom. The
-----File: 169.png---\\Paulanni\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
preaching is subordinate not to the private practice
alone, but to the religious attitude towards mankind,
which is conditioned on charity and the recognition
of human worth and sonship. The most beautiful
trait in the pastor is his universality, his simple, unaffected
manhood.

But enough of criticism. It is a privilege to belong
to a profession occupied with things ethereal;
to be interested in the grandest themes; to hold
intercourse with the loftiest minds; to live aloof
from the world; to put the happiest constructions on
the events of human life; to interpret Providence
beneficently. And it is my firm persuasion that in
proportion as the profession throws off the thraldom
of ecclesiasticism and dogmatism, it increases in
power and is sure to recover its ancient superiority.
-----File: 170.png---\\Paulanni\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------




XII.

MY TEACHERS.


Among Englishmen, I owe the most to James
Martineau, at the time of my ordination (1847), a
Unitarian clergyman in Liverpool. His lectures in
the Unitarian controversy (1839) on "Christianity
without Priest and without Ritual," on "The Christian
View of Moral Evil," on "The Bible: What It
Is and What It is Not"; his articles on "Distinctive
Types of Christianity," on "Creeds and Heresies of
Early Christianity," on "The Ethics of Christendom,"
on "The Creed of Christendom," on "St. Paul and
His Modern Students," made a profound impression
on my mind. One passage in particular, at the close
of the essay on "The Ethics of Christendom," still
lingers in my memory:

/#
The old antagonism between the world that now is and any
other that has been or is to come, has been modified, or has
entirely ceased ... <i>Here</i> is the spot, <i>now</i> is the time for
the most devoted service of God. No strains of heaven will
wake man into prayer, if the common music of humanity stirs
him not. The saintly company of spirits will throng around
him in vain if he finds no angels of duty and affection in his
children, neighbors, and friends. If no heavenly voices wan-*
#/
-----File: 171.png---\\Paulanni\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
/#
*der around him in the present, the future will be but the dumb
change of the shadow on the dial. In short, higher stages of
existence are not the refuge of this, but the complement to it;
and it is the proper wisdom of the affections not to escape the
one in order to seek the other, but to flow forth in purifying
copiousness on both.
#/

Martineau's intellectual fidelity, accurate learning,
earnestness of feeling, were exceedingly fascinating.

In this country Ralph Waldo Emerson was the
great teacher. He gave an atmosphere rather than
a dogma. He was air and light. He is best described,
not as a philosopher, a man of letters, a
poet, but as a seer. His gift was that of insight.
This he tried to render comprehensive, searching,
intelligent, accurate, by reading, study, meditation,
the acquaintance of distinguished men; but he was
never beguiled into thinking that learning, eloquence,
wit, constituted his peculiarity. He had a penetrating,
eager, questioning look. His head was thrust
out as if in quest of knowledge. His gaze was
steady and intense. His speech was laconic and to
the purpose. His direct manner suggested a wish
for closer acquaintance with the mind. His very
courtesy, which was invariable and exquisite in its
way, had an air of inquiry about it. There was no
varnish, no studied grace of motion or demeanor, no
manifest desire to please, but a kind of wistfulness
as of one who took you at your best and wanted to
draw it out. He accosted the soul, and with the
winning persuasiveness which befits friendliness on
-----File: 172.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
human terms. There was a certain shyness which
indicated the modesty which is born of the spirit.

But a commanding doer he certainly was not;
that is, he was no man of expedients, of practical
resources, of merely executive will. He appreciated
this kind of ability, as his lecture on Napoleon
shows, but he possessed little of it, his Yankee ingenuity
being more confined in its range. The moral
courage belonged to him, the earnestness, the faith,
but his ethereal qualities lacked driving force. His
principles made him interested in every movement
of reform, for he had a boundless hope which led
him sometimes into extravagant anticipations of
truth and benefit. Every sign of life, intellectual,
moral, spiritual, caught his eye, and so long as it
promised new developments of power his eager sympathy
went with it, but when the creative period
ceased he turned away. He early enlisted in the
anti-slavery cause, not because he had entire confidence
in the negro, or specially liked the abolitionists,
but because he demanded the utmost liberty for
all men in order that substantial advantages might
be widely shared; but he was not prominent among
the workers of that reform. His name stood foremost
in the list of those who claimed the emancipation
of woman from social or political disability, not
that he was a worker in the woman's-rights phalanx,
not that he looked for any immediate benefit from
that agitation, or felt any particular interest in the
leaders or in the success of that individual crusade,
-----File: 173.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
but that he was in favor of the largest opportunity
for all human beings, and wished every particle of
power to be used. From the first he welcomed the
Free Religious Association as giving promise of
original light, greater breadth, fresh vigor, new
revelations of knowledge in that most ideal, but most
deplorably limited, of all spheres; but when in his
view that promise was unfulfilled, though his name
still stood with those of its vice-presidents, he ceased
to take any part in its proceedings or to feel any
personal concern in its affairs. There was something
theoretical, speculative, in his attitude as a reformer.
His philosophy pledged him to the utmost individualism,
and this called for the utmost liberty, that
each might receive all he could of the divine fulness
and be as much as his nature required. Hence his own
limited expectation; hence his enthusiasm in behalf of
individuals like Walt Whitman, John Brown, Henry
Thoreau; hence the light that came into his eyes
when he sat in some reform convention where high
thoughts were spoken. His word was given, and it
was always inspiring, emancipating, uplifting, heard
in the valleys from the dizziest heights of vision;
but force was not his to give. Such words were
more than "half battles," to be sure, so invigorating
were they to all the champions of good causes, but
they were <i>words</i> still, and seemed to proceed from
some upper region of impersonal mind. They expressed
convictions, feelings, desires, but there was
lack of blood in them. They seemed made of air;
-----File: 174.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
there was soul behind them, but not as much body
as many wished. In a word, all the ideal elements
were present. He was a man who believed, felt,
hoped, had vast resources of faith, but was a thinker
more than an actor. Thinking is indeed doing, yet
not in the same sphere of achievement.

Emerson recognized the limitations of genius.
"Life is a scale of degrees," he says in the lecture on
the "Uses of Great Men."

/#
Between rank and rank of our great men are wide intervals.
Mankind have in all ages attached themselves to a few persons
who, either by the quality of that idea they embodied, or by
the largeness of their reception, were entitled to the position of
leaders and lawgivers ... With each new mind a new
secret of nature transpires; nor can the Bible be closed until
the last great man is born ... We cloy of the honey of
each peculiar greatness. Every hero becomes a bore at last ... We
balance one man with his opposite, and the health
of the state depends on the see-saw.
#/

Emerson looks forward to the time when all souls
shall lie open to the heavenly influx, and he regards
greatness as an earnest of that possibility. What
disappointments he must have felt as he was forced
to turn away from people who should have been
saints and heroes, but were none! What bitter
moments he must have known when he stretched
out his arms to welcome a goddess and embraced
only a cloud! But his expectations continued eager;
no feature betrayed evidence that these practical
refutations of his theory had effect on his heart.
-----File: 175.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------

Whether Emerson's constant belief in the Over-soul,
his stubborn theism, his persuasion of an immanent
God, was an advantage or a disadvantage to his
philosophical view of the universe may be doubted.
On the one hand, we cannot question the fact that
he owed to it his enthusiastic faith in the substantial
unity of creation, his optimism, his assurance of
future progress, his confidence in man, his moral
earnestness, his elevation of soul, his buoyancy of
spirit, his forwardness in all endeavors after reform.
On the other hand, it can hardly be denied that it
led him to take some things for granted, diverted his
mind from the unprejudiced observation of phenomena,
prevented his rendering full justice to the
scientific method, was the cause of wide aberrations
in his estimates of human character, and of a curious
onesidedness in his judgments on human condition.

Emerson was always profoundly religious, at
heart a supernaturalist. The blood of centuries of
pious ancestors was in his veins. His soul was
uppermost, not his intellect nor his heart. He was
a closet man, a minister at the altar. True, he
rejected every form of the religious sentiment, and
moved with entire freedom among dogmas however
expressed in word or in rite. Every attempt at
giving voice to spiritual emotion was disagreeable
to him.

/*
I like a church; I like a cowl;
I like a prophet of the soul;
And on my heart monastic aisles
*/
-----File: 176.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
/*
Fall like sweet strains or pensive smiles;
Yet not for all his faith can see
Would I that cowled churchman be.
*/

Theology had fallen from him like a shroud. He
would not venture any definition of the spiritual
laws. Doctrine had become faith; prayer was
changed into aspiration; the speechless utterance
was the only one he cordially listened to. But faith
he held fast; aspiration he cherished; the inarticulate
language of the eternal was ever in his ears.

Ever and anon would come a burst of conviction.
"Oh, my brothers, God exists!" he cries in an
ecstasy of emotion. Some years ago Emerson seemed
fascinated by the inductive method, so that some of
his admirers thought he would become a convert to
physical science. But the bent of his nature asserted
itself, and he pursued the deductive system as before.
His passion for "First Truths," as they were called,
was irresistible. He could not abandon the philosophy
of intuition, and all his studies--comprehensive,
profound, and original as they were,--his insatiable
thirst for knowledge, his inordinate appetite for
details of fact, incidents, anecdotes, gleanings from
literature of every kind, were subservient to this.

Emerson's serenity is often spoken of as evidence
of the power of his religious faith. It may allow
of this construction, but it may be accounted for on
other and different grounds which lie nearer at
hand and proceed immediately from more obvious
sources. How far may a long ancestral experience
-----File: 177.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
in devout meditations, practices, longings, worked
into the system and producing a sedate, calm, interior
temperament, go in explaining that almost imperturbable
tranquillity? The piety of his forefathers
was so genuine that it drove him from the church
of his adoption, and rendered another calling sacred.
Their descendant exhibited the same saintliness
which they possessed but in a different fashion.
And he was probably saintlier than they were,
because he was their child. His brothers had the
same characteristic of equanimity by virtue of the
same parentage. His brother William, whom I
knew intimately in New York, showed in his daily
life a similar dignity, and tradition reports the same
of Charles. It was the perfect fruitage of centuries
of heavenly-minded men, not the peculiarity of an
individual soul.

This predisposition to inwardness was favored by
the long seclusion of Concord, which kept Emerson
aloof from the world and prevented the friction
which is so damaging to serenity. He saw those
only who respected, loved, honored, and revered
him. He came into collision with none. Men of
thought, unambitious men, students, farmers, were
his fellow-townsmen. Several hours in each day he
was alone with his books or his mind. When he
visited the city it was for an intellectual or social
purpose, as one who had dropped from a star and
was soon to vanish. His contact was with men of
letters, clergymen, publishers, friends, gentlemen
-----File: 178.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
interested in mental pursuits who had left their
business in order to disport themselves in the fields
of thought. These added to his stores of wisdom,
and sent him home replenished rather than drained.
The gains of his day were not dissipated either by
business occupation or pleasure.

Then, whether from disposition or philosophy we
cannot tell, this man avoided everything dark, evil,
unwholesome, unpleasant. Sickness of all kinds,
complaint, depression, melancholy, was an abomination
to him. He turned away from ugly sights and
sounds, thus evading conflict. He never argued,
never discussed, but said his word as well as he
could, and encouraged others to say theirs, in this
way hoping to get at the truth. By this course he
escaped the usual provocations to ill-temper, and
was forced upon an undisturbed equipoise of mind.
Nothing helps serenity so much as avoidance of
contest, and when one can thoroughly convince himself
that there is no rooted evil in the world to be
fought against, an even condition of soul is not hard
to maintain; optimism is proverbially cheerful, but
an optimism that is grounded in principle must be
unconquerable by any force that circumstances can
bring against it.

It must be remembered that Emerson was not a
man of warm temperament, not tropical in color or
in heat; more like the morning, cool and breezy, than
like the sultry noon-day, or the glowing evening;
more like the dewy spring, than the effulgent sum-*
-----File: 179.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
*mer or the fruit-bearing autumn; not a child of the
sun, rather suggesting the still, white, imaginative
moonlight. There was an air of remoteness about
him. His remark to the inn-keeper,--"heat me red-hot,"
tells the story. Simple habits kept his frame
wiry, and a New England nurture saved his mind
from luxuriant uncleanness. By nature he was passionless.
The beautiful "Threnody" on the death
of his boy, reveals the sorrow of a soaring mind
rather than the grief of a crushed heart. To command
one's self enough for such an effort evinces a
rare power of rising above mortal conditions. Such
a constitution finds solitude congenial and is calm by
force of inclination. Friendship seems an emotion
better suited than love to that ethereal soul, which
was always radiant but seldom burning, benignant,
seldom craving, always gracious in imparting, seldom
hungry for receiving. One might walk in his illumination,
but one could hardly bask in his heat, or
lie on his bosom, or nestle near his heart. They
that knew him at home may speak more warmly of
him, but thus he appeared to people outside; thus he
appeared to many who had admired him as I did
and tried to get close to him.

The love of wild, untrimmed nature, the want of
interest in cultivated gardens, was part of his theory
of the universe as the expression of God; the richer,
the less it was interfered with. He would approach
as near to the Creator as possible, listening for the
divine voice, which was most clearly heard in the
-----File: 180.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
wilderness. To the same source must be ascribed
his partiality for wild, untrained men,--foresters,
hunters, pioneers, trappers, back-woodsmen. He
sought everywhere after originality, freshness, power,
in individuals and in groups. He hailed a genius,
however rough. Unconventionality excited his enthusiasm
to such a degree that he could scarcely
contain himself, but said the most extravagant things
in the ecstasy of his hope. Men of polished outside
he did not care for; mechanical men, however successful,
politicians, however popular and adroit, were
his aversion. Accomplishments, however great, scholarship
however finished, he did not respect. He
wanted the rough, uncut gem. Genius of whatever
description, in whatever class, whatever its order or
grade, was his joy. In him the love of truth predominated.
He submitted to the inconvenience of
imperfect opinion, but respected the highest law of
his being. He believed in the eternal laws of mind,
in the self-existence of right, in purity, veracity,
goodness. He was one of the most honest of men,
one of the cleanest, and he did his utmost to bring
his life into correspondence with his best thought.
That all created things must be imperfect was part
of his creed; that this imperfection ran through
human character he was as much convinced as any
man; and his efforts were unceasing to turn men's
eyes towards the beauty "ancient but ever new,"
which he in his moments of insight beheld. No one
lives up to his most exalted faith. No one ever en-*
-----File: 181.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
*deavored to do so more sincerely and humbly than
Ralph Waldo Emerson.

In my early ministry, the discourses of Dr. Orville
Dewey on "Human Nature," "Human Life," "The
Nature of Religion," seemed all-sufficing. I read them
over and over again with increasing admiration, and
his solutions of spiritual problems were accepted as
final.

Miss Mary Dewey, in the admirable memoir of her
father, lays great stress on his affectionate qualities.
These cannot be too emphatically asserted; yet they
probably had more scope than even she suspected.
Indeed, unless I am much mistaken, they formed the
basis of his character. He was a most deep-feeling
man. He loved his friends in and out of the profession,
with a loyal, hearty, obliging, warm, and even
tender emotion, expressing itself in word and deed.
It was overflowing, not in any sentimental manner,
but in a manly, sincere way. He was a man of infinite
good-will, of a quite boundless kindness. His
voice, his expression of face, his smile, the grasp of
his hand,--all gave sign of it. He felt things keenly;
his sensibilities were most acute; even his thoughts
were suffused with emotion. He could not discuss
speculative themes as if they were cold or dry.
Nothing was arid to his mind. In prayer it was not
unusual for his audience to discern tears rolling
down his cheeks. One day, in his study, on speaking
about the intellectual implications of the "Philosophie
Positive," he dropped his head and seemed
-----File: 182.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
for a moment lost in reverie largely made up of
devotion. In him, heart was uppermost; intellect,
conscience, were of subordinate value when taken
alone; in fact, they were incomplete by themselves,
and wanted their proper substance. He said once
that his skin was so delicate that the least soil on his
hands was felt all through his system and prevented
him from working. This excessive sensibility, which
could not be understood by the world at large, was
at the bottom of his likes and dislikes, of his personal
fears and hopes. Excitement drained off his
strength. He exhausted himself physically, and fell
into ill-health by exertions that would not have
taxed an ordinary constitution. It cost him a great
deal to write sermons, to visit the sick or sorrowing,
to conduct public services. At the same time, he
was disqualified, by a certain want of steel in his
blood, for any but the clerical profession, where
qualities like his are of inestimable value, and of the
rarest kind. He was a minister from the beginning,
always profoundly interested in questions of the interior
life, and though he early left the orthodox
communion and became a preacher of Unitarian
Christianity, making it his work to apply religious
ideas to all the concerns of the natural world and
the secular life, he retained all the fervor of spirit
that charaterized the most devout believer. A vein
of passionate feeling ran through all his discourses,
and while his themes were taken from daily existence,
his thoughts were fixed on eternity. He
-----File: 183.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
was absorbed in the destiny of the human soul, of
the <i>individual</i> soul, bringing all discussions to that
point, and trying to make lasting impressions on the
spiritual natures of men and women.

When I first knew him he had the reputation
of being a self-indulgent man. This was a great
mistake. His way of life was exceedingly simple,
and his habits were almost abstemious. In fact,
neither his physical nor his mental constitution allowed
of any indulgence in eating or drinking. Still
the impression was a natural one, for a certain
amount of ease, exemption from care, gayety, was
necessary to him. The society of elegant, accomplished
people was indispensable to his recreation
and rest. His motive for seeking such was not the
love of luxury so much as a demand for recreation
and a craving for repose. He was not, in any sense,
an earthy man or one who loved sensual delights.
On the contrary, he was always mindful of his calling,
always intent on high subjects, always ready to
lead intercourse upwards, always, to the extent of
his power, interested in the moral aspect of current
discussions; over-anxious, if anything, to approach
speculative themes. He possessed an eager, unresting,
questioning mind. He was always thinking,
and on great subjects of theology or philosophy, and
he put into them an amount of feeling that is extraordinary
with intellectual men.

That he should have been so sensitive as he was to
the words and suspicions of anti-slavery men who
-----File: 184.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
charged him with being an advocate of a fugitive-slave
law, an apologist for slavery, a ready tool of the
inhuman, reactionary party of the country, is not
surprising. His dread of pain, his hatred of falsehood,
his horror of injustice, his love of fair play,
will sufficiently account for this; while the impossibility
of explaining himself kept the wound open.
That for thirty years the sore should have bled,
shows the delicacy of his temperament and the
shrinking nature of his will. To speak of him as
a friend of slavery is absurd. No one can read his
sermon on "The Slavery Question," preached shortly
after the annexation of Texas and at a moment of
great excitement at the North in regard to the
advances of the slave-power, and not perceive that
he was deeply moved.

"<i>Are these people</i> <sc>MEN</sc>?" he said; "that is the
question. If they are <i>men</i>, it will not do to make
them instruments for mere convenience,--for the
mere tillage of the soil;--if they are <i>men</i>, it is
not enough to say that they have a sort of animal
freedom from care, and joyance of spirits. If they
are <i>men</i>, they are to be cultivated; their faculties
are to be regarded as precious; they are to be improved ... If
he is a <i>man</i>, then he is not only
improvable and ought to be improved, but he <i>will
<i>improve</i> in spite of all we can do." And a great
deal more to the same effect. He indignantly protested
against treating "an intelligent creature, a
fellow-being, a brother-man, a being capable of in-*
-----File: 185.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
*definite expansion and immortal progress," as one
would treat a tree, a flower, an ox, or a horse.
"Grant that the African of the present generation
cannot be raised to our stature; yet if in the course
of ages he may be, and if it is our policy systematically
to arrest or to retard his growth, does the
case materially differ from what I have supposed?"
Namely that of a child. Dr. Dewey visited slave-States
and talked with slave-holders in order to make
himself fully acquainted with the condition of opinion
and of feeling about the case, and he took occasion
everywhere to argue the Northern side. This
ought to be enough in the way of vindication of his
personal sentiments.

At the same time, he was a Unionist of the
Webster school. His attachment to the Union was
intense. Disunion in his judgment meant ceaseless
discord, the end of republican institutions, the arrest
of civilization, the indefinite postponement of progress,
the hopelessness of education and uplifting for
the slave, the withdrawal of Northern influence, the
final overthrow of government by moral powers. A
long reign of anarchy, in the course of which the
lovers of the race must see their visions of good disappear,
would supervene, and this he could not
contemplate with equanimity.

Then he was an old-fashioned enemy of war,
especially of civil war. He was a sincere lover
of peace, and a believer in the arts of peace, in
industry, education, the diffusion of intelligence, the
-----File: 186.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
weaving of the ties of fraternity; and though he
acknowledged the heroic mission of strife, he recoiled
instinctively from it. War, in his estimation,
was an inevitable necessity in the order of the world,
but it was an awful element in the "world problem";
"a fearful scourge," a condition to be outgrown
along with vice, passion, injustice, selfishness, ambition,
a sign that is destined to disappear as intelligence
and Christianity come in. It must be submitted
to as an ordination of Providence, but it should
never be precipitated by men, least of all should it
be brought on hastily, by unreasonableness, malignity,
or hate. The evils of war were precisely such
as appealed most directly to his imagination; they
were so personal, they were so domestic, they were
so pitiable, they were so full of tears. He shrank
from violence, from rage, from party ambition, from
curses and cries. He loved his countrymen, and, so
long as any reason remained, he could not bear to
think of fighting. So long as any oil was left in the
can, the troubled waters were not to be abandoned
by the peace-makers. It was much for him to have
patience with those who used angry words, even in
a cause of righteousness. He, for his part, could
not scold or overstate, or do anything in a harsh
temper.

Dr. Dewey believed in colonization; not necessarily
in Africa, but in a separation between the
white and black races, in the civilization of the
negro. In the tenth lecture of the course on "The
-----File: 187.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
Problem of Human Destiny" (1864), he takes
occasion to welcome "the great hope" that thus
was opened "for purging our American soil from
the stain of slavery. Many of us have long been
asking how this is to be done. Look at Africa,
surrounded by a wall of darkness, and filled with
cruelty and blood, with no civilizing influence in
herself, as the story of ages has proved; what now
do we see? Britain sends to her borders the man-stealer,
to tear her children from her bosom and
transport them to the American colonies. It was a
deed of unmingled atrocity, compared with which
capture in war was generous and honorable; the
African King of Dahomey grows white by the side
of the Saxon slave-trader. But what follows? The
African people in this country improve, and are
now far advanced beyond their kindred at home.
And now they begin to return; they are building a
state on their native borders which promises to stop
the slave trade with Africa and to spread light and
civilization through her dark solitudes." At the
close of his discourse on the slavery question, he
said:

/#
If I were to propose a plan to meet the duties and perils of
this tremendous emergency that presses upon us, I would engage
the whole power of this nation, the willing co-operation
of the North and the South, if it were possible, to prepare this
people for freedom; and then I would give them a country
beyond the mountains,--say the Californias,--where they
might be a nation by themselves. Ah! if the millions upon
millions spent upon a Mexican war could be devoted to this
#/
-----File: 188.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
/#
purpose,--if all the energies of this country could be employed
for such an end,--what a noble spectacle were it for all the
world to behold, of help and redemption to an enslaved
people! What a purifying and ennobling ministration for
ourselves!
#/

The intimacy with Dr. Charming re-inforced the
conclusions which were native to Dr. Dewey's temperament.
The moderate view, the dread of overstatement,
the fear of fanaticism, the faith in reason,
the love of tranquillity, the desire after truth, were
rooted in his mind. His constitutional conservatism
was confirmed. Then he was a Unitarian, and therefore
rational in his methods, inclined to judge by
arguments, to sift opinions by the understanding.
The abolitionists were, for the most part, either Calvinists
or transcendentalists, people who followed an
inward voice, who placed interior conviction before
ratiocination, and encouraged moral sentiment to
take the lead in action, blowing coals into a flame,
and not content unless they saw a blaze. The Unitarians,
as a class, were not ardent disciples of any
moral cause, and took pride in being reasoners,
believers in education, and in general social
influence, in the progress of knowledge, and the
uplifting of humanity by means of ideas. The
habit of discountenancing passion may have been
fostered in a school like this. Perhaps if young
Dewey had continued in his old belief he would
have been a more vehement reformer than he was.
His natural glow was softened down into a mild
-----File: 189.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
effulgence, communicating warmth to his convictions,
but not producing a burning zeal for any substance
of doctrine.

His power of emotion made him a powerful
preacher but prevented his being a great philosopher.
Dr. Bellows, who was his close friend for many years,
described him as a man of "massive intellectual
power," and then went on to impute to him the gifts
that belong to the pulpit orator: "poetic imagination,"
a "rare dramatic faculty of representation."
Perhaps by "massive" Dr. Bellows meant the power
to throw thoughts in a mass, with cumulative effect.
This power Dr. Dewey certainly possessed in an
extraordinary degree. But of philosophical talent
he had little. Indeed, he seemed to be conscious of
this himself. At the end of his first lecture before
the Lowell Institute he said:

/#
I am not sorry that the place and occasion require me to
make this a popular theme. I am not to speak for philosophers,
but for the people. I wish to meet the questions which arise
in all minds that have awaked to any degree of reflection
upon their nature and being, and upon the collective being of
their race. I have hoped that I should escape the charge of
presumption by the humbleness of my attempt--the attempt,
that is to say, to popularize a theme which has hitherto been
the domain of scholars.
#/

The lecture assumes the existence of a Personal
God, the reality of a conscious soul, the freedom of
the human will, the fact of a moral purpose in creation,
the perfectibility of man, the idea of progress,
-----File: 190.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
the evidence of design in the universe attesting a
divine intelligence. The treatment nowhere shows
metaphysical acumen or speculative insight. On
every page is brilliancy, eloquence, skilful manipulation
of arguments, fervent appeal to conscience.
Nowhere is subtilty or depth of intuition. Take for
example the discourse on "The Problem of Evil," the
most intellectually exacting of all subjects. It ends
thus after a series of pictures:

/#
Give me freedom, give me knowledge, give me breadth of
experience; I would have it all. No memory is so hallowed,
no memory is so dear, as that of temptation nobly withstood,
or of suffering nobly endured. What is it that we gather and
garner up from the solemn story of the world, like its struggles,
its sorrows, its martyrdoms? Come to the great battle, thou
wrestling, glorious, marred nature! strong nature! weak
nature! Come to the great battle, and in this mortal strife
strike for immortal victory! The highest Son of God, the best
beloved of Heaven that ever stood upon earth, was "made
perfect through suffering." And sweeter shall be the cup of
immortal joy, for that it once was dashed with bitter drops of
pain and sorrow; and brighter shall roll the everlasting ages,
for the dark shadows that clouded the birth-time of our being.
#/

This is not argument, but preaching---very fine,
stimulating, powerful preaching, but preaching nevertheless;
quite different from James Martineau's treatment
of the same theme, in the course of the Liverpool
lectures (delivered in 1839). Mr. Martineau, too,
addressed a popular assembly, and closed his discourse
in a strain of exhortation. Still, the grave
tone of the previous discussion sobered the rhetoric,
-----File: 191.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
and the background of the ancient debate made the
moral lessons solemn. Philosophy yielded to the
necessities of ethics, much as the "Kritik der Reinen
Vernunft" gave place to the "Kritik der Practischen
Vernunft" of Kant--the preacher and the reasoner
standing indeed on different ground, but the moral
instruction being tempered by the philosophical.

Orville Dewey was a great preacher, perhaps the
greatest that the Unitarian communion has produced;
greater as a preacher than Dr. Channing, because
more various and more sympathetic, nearer to the
popular heart, less inspired by grand ideas, and for
that reason more moving. He was imbued with
Channing's fundamental thought--the "Dignity of
Human Nature,"--and illustrated it with a wealth
of imagination, enforced it by an urgency of appeal,
quickened it by an affluence of dramatic representation
all his own. His function was to apply this
doctrine to every incident of life, to politics, business,
art, literature, society, amusement, and he did this
with a boldness, a freedom, a frankness unusual at
any time, but without example when he was in the
ministry. I shall never forget, in one of his sermons,
an allusion to a symphony of Beethoven which gave
me a new conception of the essential humanity of
the pulpit's office, of the close association that there
was between religion and art. His conversational
style, impassioned but not stilted and never turgid,
was exceedingly impressive, while his constant employment
of the forms of reasoning added weight to
-----File: 192.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
his sentences. The discourse was plain, and yet
from its copiousness it was ornate; and the affectionate
tone assumed an air of grave remonstrance
which was deepened in effect by the appearance of
formal logic. The hearer seemed to be admitted to
the secrets of a living, earnest mind, and to be listening
to something more than the usual enunciations
of ethical principle. At the same time his own will
was consulted, he was taken into partnership with
the orator and introduced to the processes of conviction.
His state of feeling was considered, his
objections were met, his scruples answered, his arguments
confronted. He was, in short, treated like a
rational being, to be reasoned with, not to be looked
down upon.

Dr. Dewey was always a friend of liberal thought.
There are no more significant pages in his daughter's
memoir of him than those which contain his correspondence
with Mr. Chadwick, one of the most radical
of Unitarian divines. He was himself a student
of divinity at Andover, early converted to Unitarianism,
became an assistant and warm friend of Dr.
Channing, but instead of remaining stationary in
dogmatic faith, took a rational view of all religious
questions, favored the largest liberality, and welcomed
every effort to adapt spiritual ideas to actual
knowledge. He had no dogmatic prepossessions,
and no professional fears. What he asked for was
sincerity coupled with earnestness. This being given,
conclusions, within certain limits, of course, were of
-----File: 193.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
little moment. Theodore Parker used to sadden and
irritate him, but less on account of his opinions than
on account of his pugnacious manner in expressing
them. Parker rather despised him for what he regarded
as his time-serving disposition, and could not
understand his mental delicacy; but men who
thought as Parker did were even then on the best
terms with Dr. Dewey, whose mellowness, on the
whole, increased instead of diminishing with age,
and was greatest in his declining years.

He was a man fond of personalities; even in his
addresses on the greatest themes, he would if possible
narrow the subject down to the measure of
individual application. Thus when lecturing on
"The Problem of Evil," after submitting various
considerations, he adds:

/#
Broad and vast and immense as that problem may appear,
it is after all, in actual experience, purely individual ...
The truth is, nobody has experienced more of it than you or I
have, or might have, experienced. With regard to all the
intrinsic difficulties of the case, it is as if one life had been
lived in the world; and since no man has lived another's life,
or any life but his own, there <i>has been</i> to actual individual
consciousness <i>but one life</i> of thirty, seventy, or a hundred
years lived on earth. The problem really comes within that
compass ... If I can solve the problem of existence for
myself, I have solved it for everybody; I have solved it for
the human race ... Do you and I find anything in this our
life that makes us prize it, anything that makes us feel that
we had rather have it than have it not? Doubtless we do and
other men do; all men do.
#/

This passage illustrates well the tendency to per-*
-----File: 194.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
*sonal reference that distinguished the man. In a
discourse on war delivered before the Peace Society
he resolves its miseries into those of the individual,
as if mass--affecting, as it does, nations, civilizations,
humanity itself--counted for nothing. This tendency
explains his fondness for his friends, his
strength of sympathy, his tenacity of attachment,
his love for people. It does not betoken a broad,
deep, philosophic mind, but it does betoken a warm,
clinging, affectionate nature.

It made him too a charming feature in society, a
delightful talker, an easy, graceful, delectable companion,
an interested adviser and counsellor, a
beloved person in his family, an excellent townsman.

We should be grateful for this, that one has lived
to irradiate a somewhat sad profession, to warm the
bleak spaces of mortal existence, to throw a gleam
of gladness upon the sunless problems of human
destiny. It is a great deal to be assured that a
living heart has walked with us, and that a living
voice has proclaimed the heart-side of man's lot.
-----File: 195.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------




XIII.

MY COMPANIONS.


These were many, but most of them are living
and cannot, therefore, be spoken of. There is an
advantage in writing about the dead, for they cannot
protest against the handsome things you say,
and they cannot remonstrate against the unhandsome
things. I shall on this account choose but two,
with whom I was very intimate, and who are very
near to my heart. I shall give sketches of John
Weiss and Samuel Johnson, and first of John Weiss.[A]

This man was a flame of fire. He was genius
unalloyed by terrestrial considerations; a spirit
lamp always burning. He had an overflow of
nervous vitality, an excess of spiritual life that
could not find vents enough for its discharge. As
his figure comes before me it seems that of one who
is more than half transfigured. His large head; his
ample brow; his great, dark eyes; his "sable-silvered"
beard and full moustache; his gray hair,
thick and close on top, with the strange line of black
beneath it, like a fillet of jet; his thin, piping, pene-*

[Footnote A: Reprinted from the <i>Unitarian Review</i> of May, 1888.]
-----File: 196.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
*trating, tenuous voice, that trembled as it conveyed
the torrent of thought; the rapid, sudden manner,
suggesting sometimes the lark and sometimes the
eagle; the small but sinewy body; the delicate
hands and feet; the sensitive touch, feeling impalpable
vibrations and detecting movements of intelligence
within the folds of organization (they say he
could tell the character of a great writer by holding
a sealed letter from his hand),--all indicated a half-disembodied
soul. His spoken addresses and written
discourses confirm the impression.

I first met him at the meetings of the "Hook-and-Ladder,"[A]
a ministerial club of which we both were
members. At the house of Thomas Starr King, in
Boston, he read a sermon on the supremacy of the
spiritual element in character, which impressed me
as few pulpit utterances ever did, so fine was it, so
subtle, yet so massive in conviction. Illustrations
that he used stay by me now, after the lapse of more

[Footnote A: We copy from a private letter the following
account of the origin of this club and of its grotesque
name, which has lost, alas! its significance to the
younger generation. "In the year 1844 (I think it was)
a few of us young ministers formed a club, including Charles
Brigham, Edward Hale, John Weiss, with one or two elders, as
Dr. Hedge and, later, O. B. Frothingham, Starr King, W. R. Alger,
William B. Greene, and others. We went long without a name,
in spite of my urgent appeals as Secretary, till one fine day,
at George R. Russell's house in West Roxbury, in an after-dinner
frolic, Weiss turned the garden-engine hose upon a fellow-member
and drenched him from head to foot; upon which escapade it
was unanimously agreed to call ourselves the 'Hook-and-Ladder,'
by which name the memory of it is fondly kept among us to this
day. A similar older fraternity had gone by the name of
the 'Railroad Association,' and, in imitation, when it was proposed
to borrow a title from some like line of industry we, on this sudden
whim, chose the fire-department."]
-----File: 197.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
than forty years. I next heard him in New Bedford,
at the installation of Charles Lowe, when, in
ill-health and feeble, he gave, in substance, the discourse
on Materialism, afterwards published in the
volume on "Immortal Life." It struck me then as
exceedingly able; and it derived force from the intense
earnestness of its delivery, as by one who could
look into the invisible world, and could speak no
light word or consult transient effects. Many years
later, I listened, in New York, to his lectures on
Greek ideas, the keenest interpretation of the ancient
myths, the most profound, luminous, sympathetic, I
have met with. He had the faculty of reading between
the lines, of apprehending the hidden meaning,
of setting the old stories in the light of universal
ideas, of lighting up allusions. The lecture on
Prometheus I remember as especially radiant and
inspiring; but they were all remarkable for positive
suggestions of a very noble kind.

His genius was eminently religious. Not, indeed,
in any customary fashion, nor after any usual way.
He belonged to the Rationalists, was a Protestant of
an extreme type, an avowed adherent of the most
"advanced" views, a speaker on the Free Religious
platform, a writer for the <i>Massachusetts Quarterly</i>,
and for the <i>Radical</i>. His was a purely natural,
scientific, spiritual faith, unorthodox to the last degree,--logically,
historically, critically, sentimentally
so,--so on principle and with fixed purpose. The
accepted theory of religion excited his indignation,
-----File: 198.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
his scorn, his amazement, and his mirth. He could
brook no dogmatic limitations, even of the most
liberal sect, but went on and on, past all barriers,
facing all adversaries, confronting every difficulty,
and resting only when there was nothing more to
discover. He had an agonized impatience to know
whatever was to be known, to get at the ultimate
data of assurance. Nothing less would satisfy him.
His cup of joy was not full till he could touch the
bottom. Then it overflowed, and there was glee as
of a strong swimmer who is sure of his tide. His
exultation is almost painful, as he welcomes fact
after fact, feeling more and more positive, with each
new demonstration of science, that the advent of
certainty was by so much nearer. Evidence that to
most minds seemed fatal to belief was, in his sight,
confirmatory of it, as rendering its need more clear
and more imperious. "We need be afraid of nothing
in heaven or earth, whether dreamt of or not in our
philosophy." "The position of theistic naturalism
entitles it not to be afraid of all the scientific facts
that can be produced." "There is dignity in dust
that reaches any form, because it eventually betrays
a forming power, and ceases to be dust by sharing
it." "It is a wonder to me that scholars and clergymen
are so skittish about scientific facts." "We owe
a debt to the scientific man who can show how many
moral customs result from local and ethnic experiences,
and how the conscience is everywhere capable
of inheritance and education. He cannot bring us
-----File: 199.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
too many facts of this description, because we have
one fact too much for him; namely, a latent tendency
of conscience to repudiate inheritance and
every experience of utility, to fly in its face with a
forecast of a transcendental utility that supplies the
world with its redeemers, and continually drags it
out of the snug and accurate adjustment of selfishness
to which it arrives." There is a great deal to
the same purpose. In fact, Mr. Weiss cannot say
enough on this head. He accepts the doctrine of
evolution in its whole length and breadth. "Of
what consequence is it whence the living matter is
derived? We are not appalled at the possibility
that organic matter may be made out of non-living,
or, more properly, inorganic matter. We are nerved
for such a result, whether it occur in the laboratory
or in nature, by the conviction that the spiritual
functions are no more imperilled by using matter in
any way, than that the Creator hazarded his existence
by originating matter in some way to be used
by himself and by us." "Science does me this inestimable
benefit of providing a universe to support
my personal identity, my moral sense, and my feeling
that these two functions of mind cannot be
killed. Its denials, no less than its affirmations, set
free all the facts I need to make my body an expression
of mental independence. Hand-in-hand with
science I go, by the steps of development back to
the dawn of creation; and, when there, we review
all the forces and their combinations that have
-----File: 200.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
helped us to arrive, and both of us together break
into a confession of a force of forces."

This cordial sympathy with science, this absence
of all savor of a polemical spirit, this hearty welcoming
of every fact of anatomy and chemistry, is
very noble and inspiring. It is very wise, too, though
the noble, hearty side was alone attractive to him.
He had in view no other, being a single-minded lover
of truth. But, nevertheless, he could not have
adopted a more politic course. For thus he propitiated
the scepticism of the age, struck in with the
prevailing current, disarmed opposition, and erected
his own principles on the eminence which scientific
men have raised and which they cannot build too
high for his purposes. He doubles on his pursuers,
and fairly flanks his foes. This throws the labor of
refuting him on the idealists, who may not care to
become responsible for his positions, and may demur
to conclusions he arrives at, while they cannot but
applaud his general aims, and wish they could give
positive assent to all his specific doctrines. There
was always this discrepancy between his sentiment
and his logic; but it came out most conspicuously
in his elaborate arguments.

The burden of his exposition was the existence of
an ideal sphere, quite distinct from visible
phenomena; facts of consciousness attesting personality,
a moral law, an intelligent cause, an active conscience,
a living heart; order, beauty, harmony, humanity,
self-forgetfulness, self-denial. As he states it:
-----File: 201.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------

/#
I claim, against a strictly logical empirical method, three
classes of facts: first, the authentic facts of the Moral Sense,
whenever it appears as the transcender of the ripest average
utility; second, the facts of the Imagination, as the anticipator
of mental methods by pervading everything with personalty,
by imputing life to objects, or by occasional direct suggestion;
third, the facts of the Harmonic Sense, as the reconciler of discrete
and apparently sundered objects, as the prophet and
artist of number and mathematical ratio, as the unifier of all
the contents of the soul into the acclaim which rises when the
law of unity fills the scene. Upon these facts, I chiefly sustain
myself against the theory which, when it is consistently explained,
derives all possible mental functions from the impacts
of objectivity.
#/

If Mr. Weiss had stopped with this general thesis,
he would probably have carried most Rationalists,
certainly the mass of Transcendentalists, with him.
They would have been only too glad to welcome so
clear and brilliant a champion. But he insisted on
gathering up these conceptions into two points of
doctrine--God and Immortality. On these points
his arguments become strained, and too subtle for
ordinary minds. Indeed, many will be inclined to
suspect his whole exposition, which would be a misfortune
of a very grave character. Mr. Emerson
avoided all definite assertion of personality carried
beyond the limits of individuality in the present
state of existence. Mr. Weiss is more daring, and
proclaims a God who arranges creation <i>as it is</i>, and
an immortality that drops what to most people constitutes
their highly valued possessions--namely,
their "animalities" of various kinds. What will
-----File: 202.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
most men think of a God who "takes his chances,"
who "in planet-scenery and animal life is at his
play," who puts up in his divine laboratory "curare
and strychnine," and cannot "recognize the word
<i>disaster</i>," though he makes the thing? To how
many will an immortality be conceivable that can
"belong only to immutable ideas," that only "springs
from the vital necessity of their own souls," that is a
clinging "to the breast of everlasting law"?

To tell the truth, the arguments themselves for
this rather questionable result of idealism are somewhat
unconvincing, not to say fanciful. They are
chiefly of a dogmatic kind, that may be met with
counter affirmations, equally valid. Many of them
are stated in a symbolical or poetical or illustrative
manner, the most dangerous of all methods. Examples
of this might be multiplied indefinitely. I
had marked several for confirmation, but they were
too long for quotation. One instance of his mode of
reasoning may be given[1]:

/#
It is objected that no thought and feeling have ever yet been
displayed independently of cerebral condition; they must have
brain, either to originate or to announce them. If brain be
source or instrument of human consciousness, what preserves
it when the brain is dead? But there would have been no
universe on such terms as that. What supplied infinite mind
with its preliminary <i>sine qua non</i> of brain matter?
#/

[Footnote 1: It occurs in "American Religion," p. 149.]

But, surely, if this is an argument at all, if it does
not beg the very question in debate--namely, whether
-----File: 203.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
there is an infinite mind,--is it not an argument for
atheism? For either the existing universe fully expresses
Deity, in which case Deity is something less
than infinite; or Deity must be conceived as very
imperfect, and a progressive, tentative Divinity is no
better than none.

To be sure, he says: "We attribute Personality
to the divine Being, because we cannot otherwise
refer to any source the phenomena that show Will
and Intellect." That is to say, we yield to a logical
necessity. To argue that materialism "reeks with
immortality" because "the baldest negation is not
merely a verbal contradiction of an affirmation, but
a contribution to its probability,--for it testifies that
there was something previously taken for granted,"--is
really a play upon words, inasmuch as the denial
is simply an affirmation of certain facts, and by no
means a categorical declaration involving all the facts
at issue. By claiming none but relative knowledge,
the antithesis is removed.

One is conscious of a suspicion that the author's
tremendous overflow of nervous vitality had much
to do with the vehemence of his persuasions. He
himself countenances such a suspicion. "I confess,"
he declares, "to an all-pervading instinct of personal
continuance, coupled with a latent, haunting feeling
that there is a point somewhere in human existence,
as there has been in the past, where animality controls
the fate of men. Where is that point? We
recoil from every effort to draw the line." He had
-----File: 204.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
a very strong sense of personality, with its inevitable
reference of persistency. "To us, perhaps," he cries,
in a kind of anguish, "no thought could be so dreadful,
no surmise so harrowing, as that we might slip
into nonentity. We impetuously repel the haunting
doubt. We shut the eyes, and cower before the
goblin in abject dread until it is gone. With the
beauty-loving and full-blooded Claudio, we cry,--

/*
Oh, but to die, and go we know not where."
*/

and he quotes the rest of the famous passage in
"Measure for Measure," adding for himself: "Put
us anywhere, but only let us live; and we could feel
with Lear, when he says to Cordelia,--

/#
/*
    Come, let's away to prison.
We two alone will sing like birds i' the cage."
*/

Then, too, there come to us the tender and overpowering
moments when we can no longer put up with being separated
from beloved objects, who tore at the grain of our life when
they went away elsewhere, with portions of it clinging to them.
We must have them again. Shall life be stabbed and no
justice compensate these sickening drippings of the soul in
her secret faintness? The old familiar faces have registered
in our hearts a contempt for graves and burials. Not so
cheaply can we be taken in, when the lost life lies quick in
memory still, and cries against the insults which mortality
wreaks on love.
#/

Is not this an exclamation of temperament?

John Weiss was essentially a poet. His pages are
saturated with poetry. His very arguments are
expressed in poetic imagery. To take two or three
examples:
-----File: 205.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------

/#
One who rides from South-west Harbor to Bar Harbor in
Mt. Desert will see a grove in which the pines stand so close
that all the branches have withered two-thirds of the way up
the trunks, and are nothing but dead sticks, broken and dangling.
But every tree bears close, each to each, its evergreen
crown; and they seem to make a floor for the day to walk on.
This pavement for the feet of heaven, more precious than the
fancied one of the New Jerusalem, stretches all round the
world, above the thickets of our spiny egotism, where people
run up into the only coherence upon which it is safe for Deity
to tread.
#/

Or this about the poet's inspired hour:

/#
Through flat and unprofitable moments, a poet is waiting
for the next consent of his imagination. The bed of every
gift, that lately sparkled or thundered as the freshet of the
hills sent its surprises down, lies empty, waiting for the master
passion to open the sluice when it hears the steps of coming
waves. The poet's nature strains against the dumb gates of
his body and his mood. With power and longing he hears
them open, and is brim full again with the rhythm that collects
from the whole face of Nature,--the hillside, the ravine,
the drifting cloud, the vapors just arrived from the ocean, the
drops that flowers nod with to flavor the stream, the human
smiles that colonize both banks of it. All passions, all
delights hurry to possess his thought, crowd into the precincts
of his person, pain him with the tumult in which they offer
him obedience, remind him of his last joy in their companionship,
and will not let him go till he ennobles them by bursting
into expression. Relief flows down with every perfect word;
the congested soul bleeds into the lyric and the canto; the
poet's burden becomes light-hearted, and the supreme moment
of his travail, when it breaks in showers of his emotion, cools
and comforts him; he must die or express himself. All the
blood in the earth's arteries is running through his heart; all
#/
-----File: 206.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
/#
the stars in the sky are set in his brain's dome. This light
and life must be discharged into a word, and the poet restored
to health and peace again.
#/

Or the following rhapsody about health:

/#
What a religious ecstasy is health! Its free step claims
every meadow that is glad with flowers; its bubbling spirits
fill the cup of wide horizons and drip down their brims; its
thankfulness is the prayer that takes possession of the sun by
day and the stars by night. Every dancing member of the
body whirls off the soul to tread the measures of great feelings,
and God hears people saying: "How precious also are
thy thoughts, how great is the sum of them! When I awake,
I am still with thee." Yes,--when I awake, but not before;
not while the brain is saturated with nervous blood, till it falls
into comatose doctrines, and goes maundering with its attack
of mediatorial piety and grace; not while a stomach depraved
by fried food, apothecary's drugs, and iron-clad pastry (that
target impenetrable by digestion) supplies the constitution
with its vale of tears, ruin of mankind, and better luck hereafter.
When all my veins flow unobstructed, and lift to the
level of my eyes the daily gladness that finds a gate at every
pore; when the roaming gifts come home from Nature to
turn the brain into a hive of cells full of yellow sunshine, the
spoil of all the chalices of the earth beneath and the heavens
above,--then I am the subject of a Revival of Religion.
#/

Or these passages about music, of which he was
always a devoted lover, a passionate admirer, an
excellent critic. My first extract is used to illustrate
the doctrine of evolution, and suggests Browning's
poem of "Abt Vogler." It should be said, by
the way, that Weiss was a great student of Browning,
whose lines in "Paracelsus," prophetic of the
-----File: 207.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
evolution doctrine, was often on his lips. He even
understood "Sordello."

/#
The divine composer, summoning instrument after instrument
into his harmony, climbed with his theme from those
which offered but a single note to those that exhaust the complexity
of thought and feeling, to combine them into expression,
kindling through hints, phrases, sudden concords, mustering
consents of many wills, releases of each one's felicity
into comradeship, till the sweet tumult becomes his champion,
and bursts into an acclaim of a whole world. "I ought--so
then I will." The toppling instruments concur, become the
wave that touches that high moment, lifts the whole deep, and
holds it there.

When perfect music drives its golden scythe-chariot up the
fine nerves, across the bridge of association, through the stern
portcullis of care, and alights in the heart of man, there is
adoration, whether he faints with excess of recognition of one
long absent, and lies prostrate in the arms of rhythm, feeling
that he is not worthy it should come under his roof, or
whether he mounts the seat and grasps the thrilling reins;
God's unity is riding through his distraction, brought by that
team of all the instruments which shake their manes across
the pavement of his bosom, and strike out the sparks of
longing.
#/

In calling Mr. Weiss essentially a poet, I am far
from implying that he was not a thinker. Perhaps
he was more subtle and more brilliant a thinker for
being also a poet--that is, for seeing truth through the
medium of the imagination, for following the path
of analogy. At any rate, his being a poet did not
in the least interfere with the acuteness or the precision
of his thinking, as any one can see who reads
-----File: 208.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
his chapters--those, for example, which compose the
volume entitled "American Religion." I had marked
for citation so many passages that it would be
necessary to quote half the book to illustrate my
thesis. When I first knew him, he was a strict
Transcendentalist. Dr. Orestes Brownson, no mean
judge on such matters, spoke of him as the most promising
philosophical mind in the country. To a native
talent for metaphysics, his early studies at Heidelberg
probably contributed congenial training. His knowledge
of German philosophy may well have been
stimulated and matured by his residence in that
centre of active thought; while his intimacy, on his
return, with the keenest intellects in this country
may well have sharpened his original predilection
for abstract speculation. However this may have
been, the tendency of his genius was decidedly
toward metaphysical problems and the interpretation
of the human consciousness. This he erected as a
barrier against materialism; and this he probed with
a depth and a fearlessness which were truly extraordinary,
and would have been remarkable in any disciple
of the school to which he belonged. No one
that I can think of was so fine, so profound, so analytical.
His volume on "American Religion" was
full of nice discriminations; so was his volume on
the "Immortal Life"; so were his articles and lectures.
His "Life of Theodore Parker" abounded in
curious learning as well as in vigorous thinking.
He could follow, step by step, the great leader of re-*
-----File: 209.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
*formatory ideas, and went far beyond him in subtlety
and accuracy of mental delineation. He could
not rest in sentiment, must have demonstration, and
never stopped till he reached the ultimate ground
of truth as he regarded it. Ideas, when he found
them, were usually, not always, expressed in symbolical
forms. His alert fancy detected likenesses
that would have been concealed from common eyes;
and often the splendor of the exposition hid the
keenness of the logical temper, as a sword wreathed
with roses lies unperceived. But the tempered steel
was there and they who examined closely felt its
edge.

He was a man of undaunted courage, being an
idealist who lived out of the world, and a living
soul animated by overwhelming convictions, which
he was anxious to convey to others as of immense
importance. He believed, with all his heart, in the
doctrines he had arrived at, and, like a soldier in
battle, was unconscious of the danger he incurred or
of the wounds he received, being unaware of his
own daring or fortitude. He was an anti-slavery
man from the beginning. At a large meeting held
in Waltham in 1845, to protest against the admission
of Texas as a slave State, Mr. Weiss, then a
minister at Watertown, Mass., delivered a speech in
which he said: "Our Northern apathy heated the
iron, forged the manacles, and built the pillory,"
declared that man was more than constitutions (borrowing
a phrase from James Russell Lowell), and
-----File: 210.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
that Christ was greater than Hancock and Adams.
To his unflinching devotion to free thought in
religion, he owed something of his unpopularity
with the masses of the people, who were orthodox
in opinion, though his failure to touch the general
mind was probably due to other causes. The class
of disbelievers was pretty large in his day and very
self-asserting. Boldness never fails to attract; and
brilliancy, if it be on the plane of ordinary vision,
draws the eyes of the multitude, who are on the
watch for a sensation.

The chief trouble was that his brilliancy was not
on the plane of ordinary vision, but was recondite,
ingenious, fanciful. He was too learned, too fond
of allusions--literary, scientific, historical,--too
swift in his mental processes. His addresses
were delivered to an audience of his friends, not
to a miscellaneous company. They were of the
nature of soliloquies spoken out of his own mind,
instead of being speeches intended to meet the
needs of others. His lectures and sermons were
not easy to follow, even if the listener was more
than usually cultivated. Shall it be added that his
sincerity of speech, running into brusqueness, startled
a good many? He was theological and philosophical,
and he could not keep his hands off when
what he considered as errors in theology or philosophy
came into view. His wit was sharper than he
thought, while the laugh it raised was frequently
overbalanced by the sting it left behind in some
-----File: 211.png---\\SMH\\fsmwalb\Scribe\--------------------------------
breasts. It was too often a "wicked wit," barbed and
poisoned, which one must be in league with to enjoy.
They who were in sympathy with the speaker were
delighted with it, but they who were not went off
aggrieved. No doubt this attested the earnestness
of the man, who scorned to cloak his convictions;
but it wounded the self-love of such as were in
search of pleasure or instruction, and interfered with
his general acceptableness. A broad, genial, good-natured,
truculent style of ventilating even heresies
may not be repulsive to people of a conventional,
believing turn; in fact, it is not, as we know. But
the thrusts of a rapier, especially when unexpected,
are not forgiven. Mr. Weiss drew larger audiences
as a preacher on religious themes than he did as a
lecturer on secular subjects, where one hardly knew
what to look for, because he was known to be outspoken
and capable of introducing heresies on the
platform.

Then he was in all respects unconventional. His
spontaneous exuberance of animal spirits, which led
him to roll on the grass, join in frolicsome games,
play all sorts of antics, indulge in jokes, mimicry,
boisterous mirthfulness, was inconsistent with the
staid, proper demeanor required by social usage.
How he kept himself within limits as he did was a
surprise to his friends. Ordinary natures can form
no conception of the weight such a man must have
put upon his temperament to press it down to the
level of common experience. Temptations to which
-----File: 212.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
he was liable every day do not visit average minds
in their whole lifetime, and cannot by such minds
be comprehended. The stiff, upright, careful old
man cannot understand the jocund pliability of the
boy, who, nevertheless, simply expends the superfluity
of his natural vigor, and relieves his excess of
nervous excitability. On thinking it all over,
remembering his appetite for life, his joy in existence,
his nervous exhilaration, his love of beauty, his
passionate ardor of temperament, I am surprised that
he preserved, as he did, so much dignity and soberness
of character. I have seen him in his wildest
mood, yet I never saw him thrown off his balance.
With as much brilliancy as Sydney Smith, he had, as
Sydney Smith had not, a breadth of knowledge, a
depth of feeling, a soaring energy of soul that kept
him above vulgar seductions, and did for him, in a
nobler way, what ambition, love of place, conventional
associations did for the famous Englishman.

The difficulty was that he was too far removed
from the common ground of sympathy. He could
not endure routine, or behave as other people behaved,
and as it was generally fancied he should. If
Sydney Smith's jocularity interfered with his promotion,
how much more did he have to contend with
who to the jocularity added an enthusiastic devotion
to heresy, a partiality for metaphysical speculation,
and a poetic glow that removed him from ordinary
comprehension! With an unworldliness worthy of
all praise, but fatal to the provision of daily bread,
-----File: 213.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
he left the ministry, a fixed income, a confirmed
social position, ample leisure for study and for literary
pursuits, and launched forth on the uncertain
career of lecturer. He was not the first who failed
in attempting to harness Pegasus to a cart, in the
hope of making him useful in mundane ways. Neither
discharged his full function. The cart would
not run smoothly, and the steed was not happy.
The old profession has this advantage: that to all
practical purposes, the wagon goes over the celestial
pavement where there is no mud nor clangor, and
Pegasus can seem to be harnessed to a chariot of the
sun.

Weiss simply disappeared from view. His books
were scattered; his lectures and sermons were
worked over and over, the best of them being published
in his several volumes. A few relics of the
author remain in the hands of his widow, who is
grateful for any recognition of his genius, any help
to diffuse his writings, and tribute to his memory.
They who knew him can never forget him. Perhaps
the very vividness of their recollection makes them
indifferent to the possession of visible memorials of
their friend.

Samuel Johnson should be known as the apostle
of individualism. The apostle I say, for this with
him was a religion, and the preaching of individualism
was a gospel message. He would not belong
to any church, or subscribe to any creed, or connect
himself with any sect, or be a member of any
-----File: 214.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
organization whatever, however wide or elastic,
however consonant with convictions that he held,
with beliefs that he entertained, with purposes that
he cherished, with plans that were dear to him.
He never joined the "Anti-Slavery Society," though
he was an Abolitionist; or the "Free Religious
Association," though its aims were essentially his
own, and he spoke on its platform. He made it a
principle to act alone, herein being a true disciple
of Emerson, whose mission was to individual minds.
He wrote a long letter to me on the occasion of
establishing the "Free Religious Association," of
which I wished him to become a member, that recalls
the letter written by Mr. Emerson in reply to
George Ripley when asked to join the community
of Brook Farm, and whereof the following is an
extract:

/#
My feeling is that the community is not good for me, that
it has little to offer me which with resolution I cannot procure
for myself ... It seems to me a circuitous and operose
way of relieving myself to put upon your community the
emancipation which I ought to take on myself. I must
assume my own vows ... I ought to say that I do not
put much trust in any arrangements or combinations, only in
the spirit which dictates them. Is that benevolent and divine,
they will answer their end. Is there any alloy in that, it will
certainly appear in the result ... Nor can I insist with
any heat on new methods when I am at work in my study on
any literary composition ... The result of our secretest
attempts will certainly have as much renown as shall be due
to it.
#/
-----File: 215.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------

Johnson ended by discarding the church entirely.
In 1881 he wrote:

/#
For my part, every day I live the name <i>Christian</i> seems less
and less to express my thought and tendency. I suspect it
will be so with the Free-thinking world generally.
#/

In a sermon, "Living by Faith," he says:

/#
There is no irony so great as to call this "flight out of
nature" and the creeds that come of it, "faith." The purity
of heart that really sees God will have a mighty idealization
of humanity at the very basis of its creed, and act on it in all
its treatment of the vicious, the morally incapable and diseased.
It is time Christendom was on the search for it.
#/

In the paper on "Transcendentalism," he says:

/#
Christianity inherited the monarchical idea of a God separate
from man, and a contempt for natural law and human
faculty which crippled its faith in the spiritual and moral
ideal. It became more and more a materialism of miracle,
Bible, church. Even its essay to realize immanent Deity yielded
a more or less exclusive, mediatorial God-man; and it treated
personality as the mere consequence of one prescriptive, historical
force, just as philosophical materialism treats it as
mere product of sensations.
#/

Mr. Johnson abhorred the monarchical principle.
It was his endeavor to track it from its origin,
through all its forms of institution, ceremonial,
dogma, symbol, from the earliest times to the latest,
through the whole East to the farthest West. This
was the burden of his studies in Oriental religions,
the sum of his criticism, the aim of his public teaching.
He was profoundly, intensely, absorbingly
religious, but the form of his religion was not
-----File: 216.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
"Christian" in any recognized sense, Romanist,
Protestant, or Unitarian. The most radical thought
did not altogether please him. His was a worship
of Law, Order, Cause, Harmony, impersonal, living,
natural; a recognition of mind as the supreme power
in the universe; a cosmic, eternal, absolute faith in
intellectual principles as the substance and soul of
the world. God was, to him, a spiritual being, alive,
vital, flowing in every mode.

/#
All power of growth and service depends, know it or not
as we may, on an ideal faith in somewhat all-sufficient, unerring,
infinitely wise and tender, inseparable from the inmost of
life, bent on our good as we are not, set against our failures as
we cannot be. It means that there can in fact be no philosophy
of life, no law of good, no belief in duty, no aspiration, but
must have such in-dwelling perfection, as being alone reliable
to guarantee its word. This only is my God; infinite ground
of all finite being; essence of reason and good ... When
you see a function of memory, or a law of perfection, let your
natural piety recognize it as wise and just and good and fair.
Be loyal to the moral authority that affirms it ought to be, and
somehow must be. Let your <i>soul</i> bring in the leap of your
mind to grasp it. Then, if you cannot see God in perfect,
absolute essence, you will know the Infinite and Eternal in
their relation to real and positive existence; feel their freedom
in your own; know their inseparableness from every movement
of your spiritual being ... The love we feel, the truth
we pursue, the honor we cherish, the moral beauty we revere,
blend in with the eternity of the principles they flow from, and
then, glad as in the baptism of a harvest morning, expanding
towards human need and the universal life of man, our souls
walk free, breathing immortal air. That is God,--not an object
but an experience. Words are but symbols, they do not
#/
-----File: 217.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
/#
define. We say "Him," "It" were as well, if thereby we mean
life, wisdom, love ... Must we bind our communion with
the just, the good, the true, the humanly adequate and becoming
to some personal life, some special body of social circumstances,
some individual's work in human progress and upon
human idealism? How should that be, when the principles
into which the moral sense flowers out in its maturity as
spiritual liberty, essentially involve a freely advancing ideal
at every new stage revealing more of God, whom nothing but
such universal energy can adequately reveal? ... If then,
we cannot see the eternal substance and life of the universe, it
is not because Deity is too far, but because it is too near. We
can measure a statue or a star, and look round and beyond it;
but the Life, Light, Liberty, Love, Peace, whereby we live
and know, and are helpful and calm and free, which measures
and surrounds and even animates us, is itself the very mystery
of our being, and known only as felt and lived. God stands
in all ideal thought, conviction, aim, which ever reach into the
infinite; and thence, as if an angel should stand in the sun,
come attractions that draw forth the divine capabilities within
us, as the sun the life and beauty of the earth. God is the
inmost motive, the common path, the infinite import of all
work we respect, honor, purely rejoice in, and fulfil; of art,
science, philosophy, intercourse,--whatsoever function befits
the soul and the day.
#/

These quotations, which might be multiplied indefinitely,
in fact, which it is difficult not to multiply,
are probably enough to satisfy any who really
wish to know that here was a truly religious man, a
really devout man, the possessor of a living faith;
one who held fast to more Deity than the multitude
cherished, and welcomed him in a much more cordial,
comprehensive, natural manner; one who fairly
-----File: 218.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
drenched the world and man with a divine spirit,
but who was all the more spiritual on this account,
as a man attests his vigor by his ability to lay aside
his crutches, and put the medicine-chest, bottles,
and boxes on the shelf, to walk in cold weather
without an overcoat, or lie naked on the ice and
melt it through.

Of course, the only justification of a pretension of
this kind is the actual vitality necessary for such a
feat, the sanity demanded by one who would stand
or go alone. In Samuel Johnson's case there was
no question of this. Spiritually, he was a whole
man, self-poised, self-contained, strong, clear, alert,
a hero and a saint. His conversation, his bearing,
conduct, entire attitude and manner indicated the
most jubilant faith. He never faltered in his confidence,
never wavered in his conviction, never
abated a jot of hope that in the order of Providence
all good things would come. There was something
staggering to the ordinary mind, in his assurance
of the divine wisdom and love. There was
something altogether admirable in the elevation of
his character above the trials and vexations that are
incident to the human lot, and that seemed heaped
upon him. For his own was not a smooth or fortunate
life, as men estimate felicity. His health
was far from satisfactory. He was not rich or
famous or popular or sought after. He lived a life
of labor, in some respects, of denial and sacrifice.
Not until after his death was the full amount of his
-----File: 219.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
renunciation apparent even to those who thought
they knew him well.

He was a Transcendentalist--that is to say, he
believed in the intuitive powers of the mind; he was
sure that all primary truths, such ideas as those of
unity, universe, law, cause, substance, will, duty, obligation,
permanence, were perceived directly, and are
not to be accounted for by any data of observation
or inference, but must be ascribed at once to an
organic or constitutional relation of the mind with
truth.

/#
That the name "Transcendentalism" was given, a century
ago, to a method in philosophy opposed to the theory of Locke--that
all knowledge comes from the senses,--is more widely
known than the fact that what this method affirmed or involved
is of profound import for all generations. It emphasized
Mind as a formative force behind all definable contents
or acts of consciousness--as that which makes it possible to
speak of anything as <i>known</i>. It recognized, as primal condition
of knowing, the transmutation of sense-impressions by
original laws of mind, whose constructive power is not to be
explained or measured by the data of sensation; just as they
use the eye or ear to transform unknown spatial notions into
the obviously human conceptions which we call color and
sound. All this the Lockian system overlooked--a very
serious omission, as regards both science and common-sense.
#/

And again, in the same article--that on "Transcendentalism,"
first printed in the <i>Radical Review</i>
for November, 1877, and afterwards included
in the volume of "Lectures, Sermons, and Essays":

/#
What we conceive these schools to have misprized is the
living substance and function of mind itself, conscious of its
#/
-----File: 220.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
/#
own energy, productive of its own processes, active even in
receiving, giving its own construction to its incomes from the
unknown through sense, thus involved in those very contents
of time and space which, as historical antecedents, <i>appear</i> to
create it; mind is obviously the exponent of forces more
spontaneous and original than any special product of its own
experience. Behind all these products must be that substance
in and through which they are produced.
#/

And again, for we cannot be too explicit on this
point:

/#
It is certain that knowledge involves not only a sense of
union with the nature of that which we know, but a real participation
of the knowing faculty therein. When, therefore, I
have learned to conceive truths, principles, ideas, or aims
which transcend life-times and own no physical limits to their
endurance, the aforesaid law of mind associates me with their
immortal nature. And this is the indubitable perception or
intuition of permanent mind which no experience of impermanence
can nullify and no Nirvana excludes.
#/

It will be observed that Mr. Johnson does not
make himself answerable for specific articles of belief
on God or immortality, but confines his faith to
the persuasion of indwelling mind, sovereign, eternal,
imperial. "Immortality," he says, "is immeasurable
chance for all. In its light, all strong, blameless,
heroic lives--divine plants by the wayside--tell
for the nature they express. God has made no
blunder in our spiritual constitution. Power is in
faith." This intense belief in the soul, in all the
native capacities of our spiritual constitution, in the
supremacy of organic feelings, ideas, expectations
-----File: 221.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
over merely private desires, this burning confidence
in divinely implanted instincts, this absolute certainty
that every promise made by God will be fulfilled,
explains the tone of exulting hope in which he
writes to bereaved friends.

/#
I wish I could tell you how firmly I believe that feelings
like these (that the absent one cannot be dead), so often
treated as illusion, are <i>true</i>, are of God's own
tender giving; that in them is the very heart of his teaching through the
mystery that we call death. Our affections are <i>forbidden by
their maker</i> to doubt their own immortality ... Immortal
years, beside which our little lives are but an hour--what
possibilities of full satisfaction they open! And we sit in
patience, knowing that they must bring us back our holiest
possessions--those which have ever stood under the shield of
our noblest love and conscience and so are under God's blessing
forever.
#/

How far such a declaration as this comports with
the demand for general immortality made in behalf
of those who are conscious of no noble love, who
have attained to no conscience, and have no holy
possessions, we are not told. Perhaps Mr. Johnson
would seize on the faintest intimations of mind as
evidencing the presence of moral being, as Mr. Weiss
does. But he did not dwell on that side of the
problem. Plainly he ascribed little value to mere
personality, viewed abstractly and apart from its
spiritual development. He wrote to those whom he
knew and loved, to remarkable people.

Yet it would not be fair to conclude that immortality
was denied to the basest. If immortality is
-----File: 222.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
"opportunity," a "chance for all," it is for those who
can profit by it or enjoy it. If any are debarred, the
cause must be their own incompetence. They simply
decease. There is no torment in store for them; no
hell is possible.

Samuel Johnson was an enthusiastic evolutionist,
but of mind itself, not of matter as ripening into
mind. The ordinary conception of evolution,--that
the higher came from the lower,--was exceedingly
repugnant to him. Every kind of materialism he
abhorred as illogical and irrational. The theories of
Comte,--that "mind is cerebration;" of Haeckel,--that
it is a "function of brain and nerve;" of
Strauss,--that "one's self is his body;" of Taine,--that
a man is "a series of sensations," were to him
as absurd, in science or philosophy, as they were
fatal to aspiration and progress.

/#
The crude definition of evolution as production of the
highest by inherent force of the lowest is here supplanted by
one which recognizes material parentage as itself involving,
even in its lowest stages, the entire cosmic <i>consensus</i>, of whose
unknown force mind is the highest known exponent.
#/

He is alluding to Tyndall's statement that mind is
evolved from the universe as a whole, not from inorganic
matter. For himself, he says:

/#
Ideas were not demonstrated, are not demonstrable. No
data of observation can express their universal meaning ...
What else can we say of ideas than that they are wondrous
intimacies of the soul with the Infinite and Eternal, its contacts
with universal forces, its prophetic ventures and master
#/
-----File: 223.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
/#
steps beyond any past! ... The grand words, "I ought"
refuse to be explained by dissolving the notion of right into
individual calculation of consequences, or by expounding the
sense of duty as the cumulative product of observed relation
of succession ... How explain as a "greater happiness
principle," or an inherited product of observed consequences,
that sovereign and eternal law of mind whose imperial edict
lifts all calculations and measures into functions of an infinite
meaning? And how vain to accredit or ascribe to revelation,
institution, or redemption, this necessary allegiance to the law
of our being, which is liberty and loyalty in one?
#/

This is absolute enough. It is plain that to this
writer the notion of extracting intellect from form is
ridiculous.

At the same time the method of evolution is the
one adopted by the supreme Mind in its endeavor to
awaken in man religious ideas. The exposition of
the original faiths--Indian, Chinese, Persian--is a
long and eloquent argument for this thesis. All
criticism, all thinking, all analysis, all study of history,
all investigation of phenomena, point in this
direction. This is the rule of creation; this is the
solution of the problem of the universe. The successive
degrees of this divine ascent, he maintains,
are distinctly traceable in the records left for our
reading. The threads are fine, of course, but what
have we eyes for? It is not necessary that everybody
should see them, and the few who can are
amply rewarded for the trouble they take in putting
their fingers upon the very lines of the heavenly
procedure. His peculiar strain of genius admirably
-----File: 224.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
qualified him for this delicate task. It was serious,
critical, earnest, and aspiring. At one period of his
life he was a mystic, wholly absorbed in God, and
he always had that tendency towards the more
passionate forms of idealism which led him to
mystical speculations. The search for God was ever
the animating purpose of his endeavor. The law of
the blessed life was never absent from his thought.
He, all the time, lived by faith, and was naturally
disposed to see the gain in all losses. His mind had
that penetrating quality which loved to follow hidden
trails, and appreciated the subtlest kinds of influence.
In a striking passage he speaks of the

/#
great mystery in these influences which thoughtless people
little dream of, and which common-sense, so called, cares
nothing about. In the wonderful manner in which, through
books, the spirits of other men, long since dead, enter into and
inspire ours; in the eloquent language of eye and lip which
without words, merely by expression, conveys deepest feelings;
in the presence in our souls of strange presentiments,
intuitions of higher knowledge than science or learning can
give, voices which seem the presence of other spirits in ours,
which make us feel often that death, so far from removing our
dear friends from us, brings them nearer to our souls so that
they <i>cannot</i> be lost;--in all these wonderful ways we see dimly
the unveiling of holy mysteries which the future is to fully
open to us, mysteries which we can even now, in our sublimer
and holier secret moments, feel trying to disclose themselves
to us.
#/

This was written in a letter to his sister, on the
occasion of a visit to the menagerie to see Herr
-----File: 225.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
Driesbach, the horse-tamer. A man who could
spring into the empyrean from such ground may be
trusted to behold Deity where others behold nothing
but dirt; and they who submit to his guidance are
pretty certain to come out full believers in the
spiritual powers.

Johnson absolutely subordinated dogma to practice,
holding fast to the idea involved in the declaration
that he who doeth the will shall know the
doctrine. He began with the ethics of the individual,
the family, the social circle, seeing every
principle incarnated there. How faithful he was in
all domestic relations the world will never know,
for there are details that cannot be divulged. But
in all public affairs his constancy was perfect. Dr.
Furness of Philadelphia used to say that the anti-slavery
struggle in this country taught him more about
the essential nature of the Gospel than he had learned
in any other way. Samuel Johnson had the same conviction.
In a private letter written in 1857 he says:

/#
Everything in this crisis of American growth centres in the
great conflict about this gigantic sin of slavery. That is the
battle-field on which the questions are all to be fought out, of
moral and spiritual and intellectual Freedom against the
Absolutism of sect and party; of Love against Mammon; of
Conscience against the State; of Man against Majorities; of
Truth against Policy; of God against the Devil. It is really
astonishing how everything that happens with us works directly
into this fermenting conflict.
#/

They who remember his addresses during the war
will not need any confirmation of this announcement,
-----File: 226.png---\\NCMom\\fsmwalb\Scribe\------------------------------
and they who heard or have read his sermon on the
character and services of Charles Sumner will have
the fullest assurance of the cordial appreciation with
which every phase of the struggle was entered into.

But though so ardent a follower of the doctrine
that ideas lead the world, Johnson was not induced
to go all lengths with the sentimentalists. While
warmly espousing the cause of the workingman his
papers on "Labor Reform" show how keenly critical
he could be of measures proposed for his benefit.
No one will accuse him of indifference to the claims
of woman, but he spoke of "Woman's Opportunity"
rather than of "Woman's Rights"; is inclined to
think that it is not true that she is left out of political
life from the present wish to do her injustice; that
"on the whole, the feeling, if it were analyzed, would
be found to be rather that of defending her right of
exemption, relieving her from tasks she does not
desire ... Among intelligent men at least,
actual delay to wipe out the anomaly of the voting
rule is not so much owing to a spirit of domination
or contempt as is too apt to be assumed, as it is to a
respect for what woman has made of the functions
she has hitherto filled, and the belief that she holds
herself entitled to be left free to work through them
alone." He has nothing to say regarding the superiority
of woman's nature; ventures no definition of
her sphere; is not unconscious of feminine infirmities;
doubts the efficacy of the ballot; confesses
that the level of womanhood would be, at least tem-*
-----File: 227.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
*porarily, depressed by the larger area of practical
diffusion; is by no means certain that women would
necessarily act for their own good, and is deeply
persuaded of the inferiority of outward to inward
influence. This is the one thing he is sure of; this
and the principle that "liberty knows--like faith
and charity--neither male nor female." In the war
between Russia and Turkey he took the part of
Turkey, not only because he respected the rights of
individual genius and resented invasion, but for the
reason that he distrusted the civilizing tendencies of
Russia, and thought the interests of Europe might
be trusted to the Ottoman as confidently as to the
Russian. In a discourse entitled "A Ministry in
Free Religion," delivered on the occasion of his
resigning the relation of pastor to the "Free Church
at Lynn," June 26, 1870, he said:

/#
The pulpit has no function more essential than an independent
criticism of well-meaning people in the light of larger
justice and remoter consequences than most popular measures
recognize. The truest service is, perhaps, to help correct the
blunders and the intolerances of blind good-will and narrow
zeal for a good cause; to speak in the interest of an idea where
popular or organized impulse threatens to swamp its higher
morality in passionate instincts and absolute masterships, to
maintain that freedom of private judgment which cannot be
outraged, even in the best moral intent, without mischievous
reaction on the good cause itself.
#/

In this connection he speaks of temperance, the
amelioration of the condition of the "perishing" or
"dangerous" classes, the various schemes for bene-*
-----File: 228.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
*fiting the laboring men, plans for adjusting the relations
of labor and capital, arrangements for diffusing
the profits of production,--causes which he had
at heart, but which should be discussed in view of
the principle of individual freedom, which must be
upheld at all hazards. He was a close reasoner as
well as a warm feeler, and would not allow his sympathies
to get the upper hand of his ideas. He
hoped for the best; he had faith in the highest; he
anticipated the brightest; but he tried to see things
as they were. He was a student, not a sentimentalist,
and while he was ready to follow the most advanced
in the direction of spiritual progress, he was
not prepared to take for granted issues that still
hung in the balance of debate, or to prejudge questions
that had not been answered, and could not be
as yet.

Such moderation and patience are not common
with reformers, and few are independent enough to
confess misgivings which are more familiar to their
opponents than to their friends. Candor like this
shows a genuine unconsciousness of fear, a sincere
love of truth, an earnest postponement of personal
tastes, ambitions, and connections to the axioms of
universal wisdom and goodness; a loyalty to conviction
that is very rare, that never can exist among
the indifferent, because they do not care, and which
is usually put aside by those who <i>do</i> care as an impediment
if not as a snare. In courage of this noble
kind, Johnson excelled all men I ever knew, for they
-----File: 229.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
who had it, as some did, had not his genius, and
were spared the necessity of curbing ardor by so
much as their temperament was more passive and
their eagerness less importunate. Of course of the
lower sort,--the courage to bear pain, loss, the misunderstanding
of the vulgar, to face danger, to encounter
peril, none who knew him can question his
possession. In fact, he did not seem to suffer at all,
so jocund was he, so much in the habit of keeping
his deprivations from the outside world; even his
intimates could but suspect his sorrows of heart.

Samuel Johnson was an extraordinary person to
look at. He had large dark eyes; black, straight,
long hair; an Oriental complexion, sallow, olive-colored;
an impetuous manner; a beaming expression.
His voice was rich, deep, musical; his gait
eager, rapid, swinging; his style of address glowing;
his aspect in public speech that of one inspired.
He was fond of natural beauty, of art, literature,
music; full of fun, witty, mirthful, social. He was
attractive to young people, delightful in conversation,
ready to enter into innocent amusements. His
eye for scenery was fine and quick, his interest in
practical science sincere and hearty, his concern for
whatever advanced humanity cordial, and his freshness
of spirit increased if anything with years.
-----File: 230.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------




XIV.

MY FRIENDS.


It is impossible to mention them all, and to single
out a few from a multitude must not be done. I
should like to commemorate those who came nearest
to me by their earnest work and faithful allegiance,
but these cannot be spoken of, and I prefer to enumerate
some of those with whom I was less intimate.

Alice and Ph[oe]be[**not sure] Cary came to New York in 1852,
and were prominent when I was there; their famous
Sunday evenings, which were frequented by the
brightest minds and were sought by a large class of
people, being then well established. These were
altogether informal and gave but little satisfaction
to the merely fashionable folks who now and then attended
them. The sisters were in striking contrast.
Ph[oe]be[**not sure], the younger, was a jocund, hearty, vivacious,
witty, merry young woman, short and round; her
older sister, Alice, was taller and more slender, with
large, dark eyes; she was meditative, thoughtful,
pensive, and rather grave in temperament; but the
two were most heartily in sympathy in every opinion
and in all their literary and social aims. Horace
-----File: 231.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
Greeley, one of their earliest and warmest friends,
was a frequent visitor at their house. There I met
Robert Dale Owen, Oliver Johnson, Dr. E. H. Chapin,
Rev. Charles F. Deems, Justin McCarthy and
his wife, Mrs. Mary E. Dodge, Madame Le Vert, and
several others.

Among my friends was President Barnard, of
Columbia College, the only man I ever knew whose
long ear-trumpet was never an annoyance; Ogden
N. Rood, the Professor of Physics at Columbia, a
man of real genius, whose studies in light and
color were a great assistance to artists, himself
an artist of no mean order and an ardent student
of photography; Charles Joy, Professor of Chemistry,
a most active-minded man, who received honors
at Goettingen and at Paris, and contributed
largely to the scientific journals; a man greatly
interested in the union of charitable societies in
New York; Robert Carter, then a co-worker in the
making of Appleton's Cyclopedia; Bayard Taylor,
novelist, poet, translator of Goethe, traveller; Richard
Grant White, the Shakesperian scholar; Charles
L. Brace, the philanthropist; E. L. Youmans a man
fairly tingling with ideas, and peculiarly gifted in
making popular, as a lecturer, the most abstruse
scientific discoveries. The breadth of my range of
acquaintances is illustrated by such men as Roswell
D. Hitchcock, of Union Seminary, the learned student,
the impressive speaker; Isaac T. Hecker, the
founder of the Congregation of the Paulists; Dr.
-----File: 232.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
Washburn, the model churchman of "Calvary";
Henry M. Field, editor of the <i>Evangelist</i>, a most
warm-hearted man, so large in his sympathies that
he could say to Robert G. Ingersoll, "I am glad
that I know you, even though some of my brethren
look upon you as a monster because of your unbelief,"
and welcomed as an example of "constructive
thought," Dr. Charles A. Briggs' Inaugural Address
as Professor of Biblical Theology at Union College;
John G. Holland (Timothy Titcomb), a copious author.
The <i>Tribune</i> company was most distinguished:
There was, first of all, the founder, Horace Greeley,
a unique personality, simple, unaffected, earnest, an
immense believer in American institutions, a stanch
friend of the working-man, and a brave lover of imimpartial[**not sure]
justice; Whitelaw Reid, who was, according
to George Ripley, the ablest newspaper manager
he ever saw; and Mrs. Lucia Calhoun (afterward
Mrs. Runkle), one of the most brilliant contributors
to the <i>Tribune</i>. Of George Ripley I may speak
more at length, as he was my parishioner and close
friend. In my biography of him, written for the
"American Men of Letters" series, I spoke of him
as a "remarkable" man. One of my critics found
fault with the appellation, and said it was not justified
by anything in the book, as perhaps it was not,
though intellectual vigor, range, and taste like his
must be called "remarkable"; such industry is
"remarkable"; no common man could have instituted
"Brook Farm" and administered it for six or
-----File: 233.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
seven years; could have maintained its dignity
through ridicule, misunderstanding, and fanaticism;
could have cleared off its liabilities; could have
turned his face away from it on its failure, with
such patience, or in his later age, could have alluded
to it so sweetly; no ordinary person could have
adopted a new and despised career so bravely as he
did. No journalist has raised literature to so high a
distinction, or derived such large rewards for that
mental labor. He deserves to be called "remarkable,"
who can do all this or but a part of it, and,
all the time, preserve the sunny serenity of his disposition.
If the biography failed to present these
traits it was, indeed, unsuccessful. Yes, Mr. Ripley
was an extraordinary man. It is seldom that one
carries such qualities to such a degree of perfection,
and it may be worth while to look more closely at
his character.

George Ripley had a passion for literary excellence.
From his boyhood he possessed a singularly
bright intelligence, a clear appreciation of the rational
aspect of questions. He was not an ardent,
passionate, enthusiastic man, of warm convictions,
vehement emotions, burning ideas. His feelings,
though amiable and correct, were of an intellectual
cast. They sprang from a naturally affectionate
heart, rather than from a deeply stirred conscience,
or an enchanted soul. If he had been less healthy,
eupeptic, he would scarcely have been so gay; a
vehement reformer he was not; a leader of men he
-----File: 234.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
could not be. He had not the stuff in him for
either. The element of giving was not strong in
him. He was not an originator in the sphere of
thought; not a discoverer of theories or facts; not
an innovator on established customs. But mentally
he was so quick, eager, receptive, that he
seemed a pioneer, an enthusiast, a saint; his quickness
passing for insight, his eagerness for a passionate
love of progress, his receptivity for charitableness.
He appeared to be more of an image-breaker
than he really was. In fact, the propensity
to iconoclasm was not part of his constitution. But
his mind was wonderfully alert. He had his antipathies,
and they were strong ones, his likes and
dislikes, his tastes and distastes, but these were instinctive
rather than the expression of rational principle
or a deliberate conclusion of his judgment. In
one instance that I know of, he threw off a man
with whom he had been associated for many years,
and in connection with whom he labored daily for
a time, a very accomplished and agreeable person
to whom he was indebted for some services, because
he thought that the individual in question had been
unjust to some of his friends; but that this was not
entirely a matter of conscience would seem to be
indicated by the fact that he sent a message of affection
to this man, as he neared the grave. In the
main, so far as he was under control, intellectual
considerations determined his course. He was prevailingly
under the influence of mind; he acted in
-----File: 235.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
view, a large view, of all the circumstances; as one
who takes in the whole situation, and has himself
under command. This is not said in the least tone
of disparagement, but entirely in his praise, for the
supremacy of reason is more steady, even, reliable
than the supremacy of feeling however exalted in
its mood. He that is under the control of mind is
at all times <i>under control</i>, which cannot be said of
one who is borne along by the sway of even devout
emotion. I have in memory cases where passion
might have betrayed Mr. Ripley into conduct he
would have regretted, had it not been for the restraining
power of purely rational considerations.
His early religious training may have produced some
effect on his character, but this is more likely to
have operated at first than at the later stages of his
career. The love of old hymns, the habit of attending
sacred services, the fondness for Watts' poems,
a copy of whose holy songs always lay on his table,
showed a lingering attachment to this kind of sentiment
up to the end of his life; but it existed in an
attenuated form, and at no period after his youth
exerted much sway over him. His predominating
bent was intellectual, and this caused a certain delicacy,
fastidiousness, aloofness, which kept him in
the atmosphere of love as well as of light.

From his youth this was his leading characteristic.
As a boy he was ambitious of making a dictionary,
a sign of his carefulness in the use of words,
and an omen of the value he was to set on defini-*
-----File: 236.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
*tions and on exactness in the employment of language.
At school he was an excellent scholar, at
college he stood second, but was graduated first
owing to the "suspension" of a brilliant classmate
who might have excelled him but for the mishap
of a college "riot" in which he took part. In the
languages and in literature he was unusually proficient,
while in mathematics,--that most abstract,
severe, precise of pursuits,--his success was distinguished.
In later-life his devotion to philosophy
marked the man of speculative tastes. His early
letters to his father, mother, sister, reveal a consciousness
of his own peculiarities. Here are extracts:

/#
The course of studies adopted here [Cambridge], in the
opinion of competent judges, is singularly calculated to form
scholars, and moreover, correct and accurate scholars; to
inure the mind to profound thought and habits of investigation
and reasoning.

The prospect of devoting my days to the acquisition and
communication of knowledge is bright and cheering. This
employment I would not exchange for the most elevated
situation of wealth or power. One of the happiest steps, I
think, that I have ever taken was the commencement of a
course of study, and it is my wish and effort that my future
progress may give substantial evidence of it.

I know that my peculiar habits of mind, imperfect as they
are, strongly impel me to the path of active intellectual effort;
and if I am to be at any time of any use to society, or a satisfaction
to myself or my friends, it will be in the way of some
retired literary situation, where a fondness for study and a
knowledge of books will be more requisite than the busy, calculating
mind of a man in the business part of the community.
#/
-----File: 237.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
/#
I do not mean by this that any profession is desired but the
one to which I have been long looking. My wish is only to
enter that profession with all the enlargement of mind and
extent of information which the best institutions can afford.
#/

These quotations are enough to show what was
the prevailing impulse of the man. An intellectual
nature like this, calm, studious, accomplished, eager,
is subject to few surprises and experiences rarely,
if ever, marked by crises, cataclysms, eruptions, in
passing from one condition of thought to another at
the opposite extreme of the spiritual universe. A
process of growth, gradual, easy, motionless, takes
the place of commotion and violent uproar such as
passionate temperaments are exposed to. In 1821
he writes to his sister from Harvard College: "We
are now studying Locke, an author who has done
more to form the mind to habits of accurate reasoning
and sound thought than almost any other." On
the 19th of September, 1836, the first meeting of
the Transcendental Club was held at his house in
Boston. In 1838 he replied to Andrews Norton's
criticism of Mr. Emerson's Address before the
Alumni of the Cambridge Divinity School. In
1840 he said to his congregation in Purchase Street:

/#
There is a faculty in all--the most degraded, the most
ignorant, the most obscure--to perceive spiritual truth when
distinctly presented; and the ultimate appeal on all moral
questions is not to a jury of scholars, a conclave of divines,
or the prescriptions of a creed, but to the common-sense of
the human race.
#/
-----File: 238.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------

But this substitution of the intuitive for the
sensational philosophy--a change which affected all
the processes of his thought and actually caused a
revolution in his mind--was made silently, quietly,
without agitation, without triumph, in a sober, conservative
manner, very different from that of his
friend Theodore Parker, who carried the same doctrines
a good deal further, and advocated them with
more heat like the burly reformer he was.

In religion, Mr. Ripley's position was the same
that it was in philosophy. In fact the intellectual
side of religion interested him more than the spiritual
or experimental side. It was mainly a speculative
matter, where it was not speculative it was
practical; in each event it concerned the head
rather than the heart, as being an opinion rather
than a feeling. He was instructed in the school of
orthodoxy, and, as a youth, was strict in his allegiance
to the old system of belief; but he became a
disciple of Dr. Channing, and later a rationalist of
the order of Theodore Parker, a friend of Emerson,
an adherent of what was newest in theology. Yet,
in this extreme departure from the views of his
early years, he betrayed no sign of agitation, no
trace of internal suffering. He wished to go to
Yale instead of Harvard, because "the temptations
incident to a college, we have reason to think, are
less at Yale than at Cambridge." He preferred
Andover to Cambridge, being "convinced that the
opportunities for close investigation of the Scrip-*
-----File: 239.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
*tures are superior to those at Cambridge, and the
spirit of the place, much relaxed from its former
severe and gloomy bigotry is more favorable to a
tone of decided piety." Still, he goes to Cambridge,
is "much disappointed in what he had
learned of the religious character of the school,"
and, on more intimate acquaintance is impressed by
"the depth and purity of their religious feeling and
the holy simplicity of their lives"; "enough to
humble and shame those who had been long professors
of Christianity, and had pretended to superior
sanctity." In 1824 a bold article in the <i>Christian
Disciple</i>, a Unitarian journal, the precursor of
the <i>Christian Examiner</i>, excited a good deal of
comment, not to say apprehension. He writes to
his sister about it as follows:

/#
You asked me to say something about the article in the
<i>Disciple</i>. For myself, I freely confess that I think it a useful
thing and correct. The vigor of my orthodoxy, which is
commonly pretty susceptible, was not offended. Now, if you
have any objections which you can accurately and definitely
state, no doubt there is something in it which had escaped
my notice. If your dislike is only a misty, uncertain feeling
about something, you know not what, it were well to get
fairly rid of it by the best means.
#/

The same year he writes to his mother:

/#
I am no partisan of any sect, but I must rejoice in seeing
any progress towards the conviction that Christianity is indeed
"<i>glad tidings of great joy</i>," and that in its original purity
it was a very different thing from the system that is popularly
preached, and which is still received as reasonable and
#/
-----File: 240.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
/#
scriptural by men and women, who in other respects are sensible
and correct in their judgments. When shall we learn
that without the spirit of Christ we are none of us His?
I trust I am not becoming a partisan or a bigot. I have suffered
enough, and too much, in sustaining those characters,
in earlier, more inexperienced, and more ignorant years; but
I have no prospects of earthly happiness more inviting than
that of preaching the truth, with the humble hope of impressing
it on the mind with greater force, purity, and effect than
I could do with any other than my present conviction.
#/

In 1840 the ministry was abandoned forever, for
more secular pursuits. After 1849 his activities
were wholly literary; he had no connection with
theology, and none who did not know his past suspected
that he had once been a clergyman.

The same cast of thought, not "pale" in his case,
suffused his action at Brook Farm and made a
Utopia quiet, calm, dignified, pervaded by the radiance
of mind, the gentle enthusiasm of the intellect.
The heat came in the main from other sources. He
was receptive rather than original, inflammable
rather than fiery, brilliant rather than warm. The
heat was supplied by those near him, by those he
trusted, and by those he loved. Not that he was
deficient in concern for society; far from it; but
his interest was more philosophical than philanthropic.
The subject of an association that should
combine intellectual and mechanical labor and should
diminish the distance between the tiller of the ground
and the educator was agitated among the thinkers
he was intimate with. Dr. Channing had such a
-----File: 241.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
project at heart. Mrs. Ripley burned with humane
anticipations. Plans for social regeneration were in
the air. It was impossible for one who lived in the
midst of ardent spirits, or was sensitive to fine impressions,
or was cultivated in an ideal wisdom that
was not of this world, to escape the contagion of
this kind of optimism; Emerson was saved by his
belief in individual growth; Parker by his steady
common-sense; others were protected by their conservatism
of temperament or of association, by their
want of courage, or their want of faith; but men
and women of ideal propensities, like Nathaniel
Hawthorne, W. H. Channing, J. S. Dwight, joined
the community, which promised a new era for
Humanity. Mr. Ripley would probably have left
the ministry at any rate, for it had become distasteful
to him, but it is not likely that he would have
undertaken the management of Brook Farm unless
he had been assured of its success; for he was a
New England youth by birth and by disposition,
prudent, careful, thrifty; his very enthusiasm was
of the New England type, the product of theological
ideas, a creation of the gospels, a desire to introduce
the "Kingdom of Heaven," a continuance of the
prophetic calling. New England is as noted for its
fanaticism as it is for its theology. Its fanaticism
is the offspring of its theology, and in proportion as
its theology disappears its fanaticism decreases. In
Mr. Ripley's case the theology had reached very
near to its last attenuation and the fanaticism had
-----File: 242.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
tapered off into a gentle enthusiasm. He undertook
to establish a kingdom of heaven on earth because
he had given up the expectation of a kingdom of
heaven in the skies; and he undertook to establish
a kingdom of heaven on earth by rational, economic
means, not by religious interventions. He was subject
to that peculiar kind of excitement that comes
to a few people in connection with the keen exercise
of their intellectual powers, when they have laid
hold of what seems to them a principle--an excitement
that is easily mistaken for moral earnestness
even by one who is under its influence, which, indeed,
lies so close to moral earnestness as to feel
quickly the effect of moral earnestness in others,
notwithstanding the checks applied by practical
wisdom. Mr. Ripley had struck on a theory of
society, which at that time was passing from the
phase of feeling into the phase of philosophy. The
theory was in the air; the most susceptible spirits
were full of it; all noble impulses were in its favor,
it belonged to the order of thought he had attained;
it was native to the aspirations that inflamed the
men and women with whom he was most intimate;
their feelings awoke his intellect, and he was carried
away by a stream whereof he appeared to himself
to be a tributary and whereof he appeared to
others as the main current, on account of his impetuosity,
and the vigor with which he proceeded to
put the idea into practice. In his own mind he
was realizing the dream of the New Testament, but,
-----File: 243.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
in fact, he was testing a principle of which the New
Testament was quite unconscious, the modern principle
of the equal destinies of all men. He had
abandoned the New Testament ground of allegiance
to Jehovah, and had adopted the human ground of
fidelity to social law. He was still under the spell
of religious emotions, but they had become merged
in the abstractions of rationalism and merely lent
an added glow to his ideas, so that he could readily
imagine that he was actuated by spiritual convictions
when, in fact, he was doing duty as a disciple
of socialist philosophers. His own interest in Brook
Farm was in the main speculative, though through
his personal sympathies he was moved toward an
enterprise that had moral ends in view.

Once embarked in it, he gave his whole mind to
its accomplishment,--all his industry, all his organizing
talent, all his high sense of duty. He worked
day and night; he wrote letters; he answered inquiries;
he mastered the science of agriculture; he did
the labor of a practical farmer; he maintained the
supervision of the strange family that gathered
about him. Very remarkable was his success in
keeping the intellectual side uppermost, in keeping
clear of the temptations to give way to instinctive
leanings. His associations were with books and
study and bright people. He brought the most
brilliant men and women of the day to the place.
He awakened the interest of the general community.
He diffused an atmosphere of cheerful hope
-----File: 244.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
around the experiment. It is easy to make sport of
Brook Farm; to laugh at the odd folks who came
there; to ridicule their motives and actions; to
repeat stories of extravagant conduct; to tell of the
eccentric behavior of men and maidens who were
right-minded but impulsive; to follow spontaneous-*ness
to its results; to trace the course of unrestricted
liberty. But it is not fair to remember these things
as peculiarities of Brook Farm, as incidents of its
conception, or as incidents that were agreeable to
Mr. Ripley. He exerted the whole weight of his
character against them. He watched and guarded.
We do not hear of him in connection with the scandals,
the laxities, or the frolics. His efforts were
directed to the supremacy of ideas over instinct, the
idea of a regenerated society, something very different
from joyousness, or merriment, or the fun of
having a good time. He, too, was gay; he felt the
delight of freedom; but his gayety was born of
happy confidence in the principle at stake, his delight
was connected with the advent of a new method of
intercourse among men. I remember hearing him
once deliver a speech in Boston. In it he spoke of
the "foolishness of preaching," and avowed his willingness
to be a pioneer in the task of breaking out
a new future for humanity, a ditcher and delver in
the work of constructing the new building of God.
He had the coming time continually in view. Others
might enjoy themselves, others might grow tired of
waiting, but he held smiling on his way, determined
-----File: 245.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
to carry out the idea to the end. There was something
grand in the steady intellectual force with
which he did his best to carry through a principle
that commanded more and more the assent of his
reason. When the demonstration of Charles Fourier
was laid before him, no argument was required to
persuade him to adopt it. He took it up with all
his energy; his enthusiasm rose to a higher pitch
than ever; the rationale of the movement was revealed
to him, and apparently he saw for the first
time the full significance of the scheme he had been
conducting. The impelling power of an intellectual
conviction was never more splendidly illustrated.
Nobody discerned so clearly as he did the financial
hopelessness of the experiment. Nobody felt the
burden of responsibility as he felt it. Yet he did
not flinch for a moment, and his patient assumption
of the indebtedness at last had the stamp of real
heroism upon it. His renewal of the most painful
traditions of "Grub Street" until the liabilities of
Brook Farm were cleared off is one of the noble histories,
a history that cannot be told in detail because
of the modesty which has left no record of toil undergone
or duty done. The old simile of the sun
struggling with clouds, and gradually clearing itself
as the day wears on, best illustrates my view of this
man's accomplishment. There were the clouds of
orthodoxy which were burned away at Cambridge.
Then came the clouds of Unitarian divinity, which
were dispelled by the transcendental philosophy.
-----File: 246.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
These were succeeded by the dark vapors of the
ministry, and these by the sentimental philanthropy
of New England rationalism. At length his intellect
broke through these obscurations and showed
what it truly was.

On the failure of Brook Farm and the final dismissal
of all plans for creating society anew, Mr.
Ripley's faculties emerged in their full strength.
The New England element was withdrawn. There
was no longer thought for theology or reform, but
solely for knowledge and literature. In Boston he
had taken on himself every opprobrious epithet. In
his final letter to his congregation he avows his interest
in temperance, anti-slavery, peace, the projects
for breaking down social distinctions; simply, it
would seem, because his philosophy, falling in with
popular sentiment, pointed that way; for he was
never publicly identified with any of these causes,
or ranked by reformers in the order of innovators.
Indeed, one of the old Abolitionists told me that she
had never associated him with the anti-slavery people,
though her family went to his church. In New
York there was no pretence of this kind. The devotion
to literature absorbed his attention. His
democratic concern for the workingmen continued,
but in a theoretical manner, if we may judge from
the fact that he took no part in domestic or foreign
demonstrations, that he made no speech, attended no
meeting, consorted with no social reformers, did not
even keep up his intimacy with the original leaders
-----File: 247.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
of socialism in this country. When the sadness of
his first wife's death was over, and the drudgery of
toil was ended, he was happier than he had ever
been. No time was wasted; no talent was misused.
Mental labor was incessant, but in performing it
there was pure delight. It is usual to think of his
early life as his best, and there were some who regarded
him as an extinct volcano; but I am of the
opinion that his latter years were his most characteristic,
and that he was most entirely himself when his
intellectual nature came to its full play. In proportion
as the "olden thoughts, the spirit's pall," fell off,
he became peaceful and sweet; his view backward
and forward became clear, his purpose steady, his
will serene. The past was distasteful to him and
he seldom alluded to it; but as one puts his childhood
and his age together, a steady development is
seen to run through both. His could not be a cloudless
day, but he went on from glory to glory. His
age more than justified the promise of his youth.
In his latter years he befriended aspiring young
men; he made literature a power in America; he
threw a dignity around toil; he associated knowledge
with happiness, and rendered light and love
harmonious. His favorite author was Goethe, the
apostle of culture. His familiarity with Sainte-Beuve,
the master of literary criticism, was so great, that on
occasion of that writer's decease, he sat down and
wrote an account of him without recourse to books.
Though without knowledge of art, destitute of taste
-----File: 248.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
for music, and deficient in sthetic appreciation, his
sympathy was so large and true that these deficiencies
were not felt. The intellectual sunshine was
shed over the entire nature, and the book was so
universal that it seemed to embrace everything.

This is the property of pure mind, rarely seen in
such perfection of lucidity. Such a mind is at once
conservative and radical; conservative as treasuring
the past, radical as anticipating improvement in
the future. There is nothing like fanaticism, but a
bright look in every direction, a place for all sorts
of accomplishments, hospitality to each new invention,
a radiant acceptance of all temperaments.
The mind cannot be superstitious, for it cannot believe
that divine powers are identified with material
objects or occasional accidents; it cannot be ever
sanguine as those are who indulge in abstract visions
of good, for it knows that progress is very slow and
gradual, and that the welfare of mankind is advanced
by the process of civilization, by cultivation,
acquirement, refinement, the gains of wealth, elegance,
and delicacy of taste. It judges by rational
standards, not by sentimental feelings, accepting
imperfection as the inevitable condition of human
affairs and bounded characters. It is not exposed
to the convulsions that accompany even the most
exalted moods, but calmly labors and quietly hopes
for the future.

I do not say that George Ripley was such a mind,
merely that his tendency was in that direction. He
-----File: 249.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
was limited by traditions; he had too many prejudices.
The axioms of the transcendental philosophy
clung to him. The shreds of religion hung about
him. He could not divest himself of the ancient
clerical memories and ways, nor wholly throw off
the mantle of personal sympathy he had so long
worn. He was not completely secular.

That he was a perfect man is less evident still.
His sunny quality was due in some degree to a
happy temperament, and was subject to the eclipses
that darken the blandest natures, and render sombre
the most hilarious spirits. He lacked the steadfast
courage of conviction, was somewhat over-prudent
and timid, afraid of pain, of popular disapproval, of
criticism and opposition. This may have been due
in part to his frequent disappointments and the
carefulness they forced upon him, to the distrust in
his own judgment which he had occasion to learn,
and the necessity of confining his action to the point
immediately before him. But I am inclined to think
that this apprehensiveness was constitutional. If
it is suggested by way of objection that the bold
experiment of Brook Farm, made in the face of
obloquy and derision, indicated moral courage of a
high stamp, I would remind the critic of the warm
approbation of his friends, and the confident expectation
of success on the part of those he was intimate
with. His wife not merely gave him her
countenance but stimulated his zeal, and surrounded
him every day with an atmosphere of faith. He
-----File: 250.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
had the applause of Dr. Channing, and the support
of his brilliant nephew. Men like Hawthorne, Ellis
Gray Loring, George Stearns, not to mention others,
urged him on. His own well-beloved sister was one
of his ardent coadjutors. He had hopes of Emerson.
In short, so far from being alone, he stood
in an influential company, and instead of his being
altogether unpopular was encompassed by the goodwill
of those he prized most. It would have required
courage to resist such influences. Besides,
he was inflated by a momentary enthusiasm which
carried him along in spite of himself and would not
allow his judgment to work. A sudden storm
struck him, lifted unusual waves, caused unexampled
spurts of foam, made the ordinarily quiet water
boisterous and dangerous, and threw long lines of
breakers on the coast, so that what was a still lake
became of a sudden a tempestuous sea. One must
not hastily imagine that the water had become an
ocean, or that it was really an Atlantic formerly
supposed to be a pool.

Then it must be said he loved money too well.
This infirmity was not native to him, but must
probably be imputed to early poverty, the necessity
of working hard in order to pay debts not altogether
of his own contracting, thus pledging the meagre
income of the first sixty years of his life. His final
income was large, but it was earned by incessant
literary toil, which naturally rendered him avaricious
of the rewards that might come to him. His gen-*
-----File: 251.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
*erosity did not have a fair chance to show itself
outside of his family. There it was lavish, but
there it was too much mixed up with affection, duty,
and pride to be credited to his manhood. He did
not live long enough, either, to attain complete
superiority over his accidents. He was already an
old man before he had money for his wants. I
remember meeting him on Broadway in 1861, the
year of his wife's death, and he said: "My grief is
embittered by the thought that she died just as I
was getting able to obtain for her what she needed."
He was then fifty-nine years of age. It cannot be
expected that any impulse of generosity will overcome
the habits of a life-time at so advanced a period
as this. That they showed themselves at all is remarkable,
and establishes as well their power as their
existence.

In a word, this man was too heavily weighted by
circumstances to do his genius full justice. He
seemed to be two individuals, with little in common
between them. As one looked at his past or at
his present, his real character was differently judged.
The most plausible account of him was that which
supposed the experiences to be buried in a deep
grave, which was seldom uncovered even by the
man himself, who lived in the day before him, and
rarely glanced back save to mourn over or to make
sport of his former career. The only way of establishing
a unity in his history is to concede the supremacy
of the intellectual quality over the moral in his first
-----File: 252.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
endeavors. The prejudice in favor of the moral was
and is so strong that to maintain this supremacy will
seem like a condemnation of him, though meant in
his praise. He probably would so have considered
it, especially when carried away by the flood of
memories. It was easy for him to be mistaken.
His merit consists in the energy of the reason which
made headway against a host of disadvantages and
achieved something resembling a victory in the end.
Some time hence, when the homage paid to sentiment
shall have yielded to the worship of knowledge,
George Ripley will be regarded as one of the earliest
apostles of the light.

All these greatly enriched my life in New York,
opened new spheres of activity, and enlarged my
whole horizon, both intellectually and socially. Their
variety, elasticity, and vigor in many fields of intellectual
force added much to the extension of my
view, and acted, not merely as a refreshment, but
also as a stimulus.
-----File: 253.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------




XV.

THE PRESENT SITUATION.


The progress of mind is continuous. Strictly
speaking, there are no periods of transition, no crises
in thought. The history of ideas presents no gap.
Every stage begins and ends an epoch. One is
often reminded of the common notion that the year
begins and ends at a particular moment. Every
day begins and ends a year; every hour is equally
sacred. Yet solemn thought, worship, self-examination,
are precious, and these can be secured only by
the observance of times and seasons; so that we
fall on our knees and pray when the old year ends
and the new one begins.

So, as a point of time must be fixed upon, we will
begin with Thomas Paine. It is not easy to speak
fully and justly of Paine, because in so doing we
must speak of the misapprehensions and mis-statements
of which he has been the victim; and even if
we refute these, the bare mention of them leaves a
stain on his fame. No doubt his method--application
of common-sense to religion--was essentially
vicious. Common-sense is an admirable quality in
practical affairs, quite indispensable in the manage-*
-----File: 254.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
*ment of business of all kinds, but it has no place in
the discussion of works of the higher imagination--of
poetry, art, music, or faith. But such was the
man's genius, such was the demand of his age. It is
easy to speak of his ignorance, his coarseness, his
impudence, his vanity; but it must be remembered
that his education was very imperfect, for he was
utterly ignorant of any language but his own, and
he did not, apparently, read even the English deists;
that he was a man of the people; that he lived
in an age of revolutions; that he stood for the
rights of common humanity. It must be remembered
also that, in the first place, he brought the
human mind face to face with problems which had
been appropriated by a special class that considered
itself exempt from criticism. In the next place he
was in dead earnest; not attacking the Bible or
religion out of flippancy or brutality, but because
he really hated the interpretations that were usually
given of sacred things; his attack was against orthodoxy,
not against faith. "His blasphemy," says
Leslie Stephen, "was not against the Supreme God,
but against Jehovah. He was vindicating the ruler
of the universe from the imputations which believers
in literal inspiration and dogmatical theology had
heaped upon him under the disguise of homage.
He was denying that the God before whom reasonable
creatures should bow in reverence could be the
supernatural tyrant of priestly imagination, who
was responsible for Jewish massacres, who favored
-----File: 255.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
a petty clan at the expense of his other creatures,
who punished the innocent for the guilty, who
lighted the fires of everlasting torment for the
masses of mankind, and who gave a monopoly of
his favor to priests or a few favored enthusiasts.
Paine, in short, with all his brutality, had the conscience
of his hearers on his side, and we must
prefer his rough exposure of popular errors to the
unconscious blasphemy of his supporters." Then
Paine <i>did love his kind;</i> he abhorred cruelty, and
desired, after his fashion, to elevate his race.

Examples of this are numerous. At the time
when the "Common Sense" and "Crisis" were
having an enormous sale, the demand for the former
reaching not less than one hundred thousand copies,
and both together offering to the author profits that
would have made him rich, Paine freely gave the
copyright to every State in the Union. In his
period of public favor and of intimate friendship
with the founders of the government, Paine declined
to accept any place or office of emolument, saying:
"I must be in everything, as I have ever been, a
disinterested volunteer. My proper sphere of action
is on the common floor of citizenship, and to honest
men I give my hand and heart freely." The State
of Virginia made a large claim on the general government
for lands. Thomas Paine opposed the
claim as unreasonable and unjust, though at that
very time there was a resolution before the legislature
of Virginia to appropriate to him a handsome
-----File: 256.png---\\gajeff47\\fsmwalb\Scribe\---------------------------
sum of money for services rendered. In 1797, Paine
was the chief promoter of the society of "Theo-philanthropists,"
whose object was the extinction of
religious prejudices, the maintenance of morality,
and the diffusion of faith in one God. "It is want
of feeling," says this <i>heartless blasphemer</i>, "to talk
of priests and bells, while infants are perishing in
hospitals, and the aged and infirm poor are dying in
the streets." In 1774, Paine published in the <i>Pennsylvania
Journal</i>, a strong, anti-slavery essay.
While clerk in the Pennsylvania Legislature he
made an appeal in behalf of the army, then in extreme
distress, and subscribed his entire salary for
the year to the fund that was raised. Towards the
close of his life, he devised a plan for imposing a
special tax on all deceased persons' estates, to create
a fund from which all, on reaching twenty-one
years, should receive a sum to establish them in
business, and in order that all who were in the decline
of life should be saved from destitution. It is
not generally known that Paine often preached on
Sunday afternoons at New Rochelle. In England
he spoke in early life from Dissenting pulpits, and to
him we owe this exquisite definition of religion: "It
is man bringing to his Maker the fruits of his heart."
All this is evidence that honorable considerations
were at the bottom of his own belief. He was, according
to his view, the friend of man, and in this
interest wrote his books. He introduced kindness
into religion.
-----File: 257.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------

He certainly repeated the ideas of Collins and
Toland, and the conceptions that were floating in
the air, breathed by Voltaire and Diderot; but he
did give them voice. The English deists were dead,
and would have continued so but for him. He was
essentially a pamphleteer, the master of a very rich,
simple style that went directly to the hearts of the
people. His best performances were unquestionably
political, but all his works were marked by the same
peculiarities. His mistake was in supposing that
the power that could animate an army could pull
down a church.

Paine was no saint, but he was no sinner above all
that dwelt in Jerusalem. He drank too much; he
took too much snuff; he was vulgar; he was a vehement
man in a vehement age; he went to dinner
in his dressing-gown; and he certainly did not bring
his best convictions to bear on his private character;
but he did wake up minds that had been dumb or
oppressed before. The "Age of Reason" went
everywhere, into holes and corners, among backwoodsmen
and pioneers, and did more execution
among plain moral men than many a book that was
more worthy of acceptance. It is a pity that his
disciples should be content with repeating his denials,
instead of building on the rational foundations
which he laid. For instance, they might, while
adding to his criticism of the Scriptures, have shown
their high moral bearing and their spiritual glow.
They might have carried out further his "enthusiasm
-----File: 258.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
for humanity," showing that man had more in him
than Paine suspected. They might have justified by
more scientific reasons his belief in God and in immortality.
They might have been truly rationalists
as he wanted to be, but could not be at that period.
But they were satisfied with saying over and over
again what he said as well as he could, but not as
well as they can. He was simply a precursor, but
he was a precursor of such men as Colenso and
Robertson Smith, and a large host of scholars beside.

Paine's best exponent in America is perhaps Robert
G. Ingersoll. He is a sort of transfigured Paine.
He has all Paine's power over the masses, being perhaps
the most eloquent man in America; more than
Paine's wit; more than Paine's earnestness; more
than Paine's love of humanity; more than Paine's
scorn of deceit and harshness,--for he extends his
abhorrence of cruelty even to dumb beasts. He has
great power of sympathy, a tender feeling for misery
of all kinds. He is a poet, as is evident from these
words:

/#
We do not know whether the grave is the end of this life or
the door of another, or whether the night here is somewhere
else a dawn. The idea of Immortality, that like a sea has
ebbed and flowed into the human heart with its countless waves
beating against the shores and rocks of time and faith, was not
born of any book or of any creed or of any religion. It was
born of human affection, and it will continue to ebb and flow
beneath the mists and clouds of doubt and darkness as long as
love kisses the lips of death. It is the rainbow, Hope, shining
upon the tears of grief.
#/
-----File: 259.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\czupirek\Scribe\----------------------

Paine's simple childlike belief in God and Immortality,
Ingersoll remands to the cloudy sphere of
agnosticism, as Paine probably would now; but it
is my opinion that if evidence which he regarded as
satisfactory--that is, legal evidence--could be given,
he, too, would accept these articles; for he has none
of the elements of the bigot about him. His detestation
is simply of hell and a priesthood; for pure,
spiritual religion, he has only respect. Like Paine,
he attacks the ecclesiasticism and theology of the
day, and is satisfied with doing that; and, like
Paine, he has convictions instead of opinions, and his
character is all aflame with his ideas.

In his private life, in his family relations, in his
public career, there is no reproach on his name--nothing
that he need be ashamed of.

Mr. Ingersoll does not worship the Infinite under
any recognized form or name, but that he adores the
<i>substance of deity</i> is beyond all doubt; he worships
truth and purity and sincerity and love,--everything
that is highest and noblest in human life. One word
more I must say,--that his motive is essentially religious.
It is his aim to lift off the burden of superstition
and priestcraft; to elevate the soul of manhood
and womanhood; to promote rational progress in
goodness; to emancipate every possibility of power in
the race; and this is the aim of every pure religion,--to
open new spheres of hope and accomplishment.

The disintegration of the popular orthodoxy goes
on very fast, and always under the influence of the
-----File: 260.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
moral sentiment. This is very prettily put by Miss
Jewett, in one of her short stories, entitled "The
Town Poor." Two ladies, jogging along a country
road, fall to talking about an old meeting-house
which is being <i>improved</i> after the modern fashion.
One of them laments the loss of the ancient pews
and pulpit, and the substitution of a modern platform
and slips. The other says:

/#
When I think of them old sermons that used to be preached
in that old meeting-house, I am glad it is altered over so as not
to remind folks. Them old brimstone discourses! you know
preachers is far more reasonable now-a-days. Why, I sat an'
thought last Sabbath as I listened, that if old Mr. Longbrother
and Deacon Bray could hear the difference, they'd crack the
ground over 'em like pole beans, and come right up 'long side
their headstones.
#/

In Chicago, some years ago, orthodox preachers
begged a pronounced radical to stay and help them
fight the matter out on the inside; and a minister of
one of the principal churches there distinctly said
that he did not believe in the infallibility of the
Bible or an everlasting punishment. A Congregational
minister in Connecticut expressed himself as
thoroughly in sympathy with the advanced party in
theology. An orthodox clergyman in New England
declared that he did not know of an orthodox minister
in the whole range of his acquaintance who
believed in the old doctrine. A minister in Rhode
Island, who occupied a high position in the orthodox
church, while declining to make an open state-*
-----File: 261.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
*ment on account of social and political reasons,
avowed his willingness to write a private letter
disclaiming all belief in the accepted views. The
Rev. Howard MacQueary, the Episcopal rector of
Canton, Ohio, who has recently published a book,
entitled the "Evolution of Man and Christianity,"
has been convicted of heresy against his own protest
and the popular sentiment. The successor of Henry
Ward Beecher, in Brooklyn, N. Y., recently published
the essentials of his creed. There is no fall
in it, no trinity, no miracle in the old sense, no eternal
punishment. He declares, frankly, that there is
no difference <i>in kind</i> between man, Jesus, and God,
but only a difference <i>in degree</i>. The same man
recently preached in King's Chapel, and lectured
in Channing Hall. The Andover controversy distinctly
reveals the decay of the ancient theology.
In England dissent has gone very far, as is evident
from a book called "The Kernel and the Husk,"
written by the Rev. Dr. E. A. Abbott, the author of
the article on "The Gospels," in the last edition of
the "Encyclopdia Britannica." In this article the
fall is repudiated, the trinity, miracles, the virgin
birth, the physical resurrection of Jesus, and eternal
punishment; yet even his bishop has not rebuked
him. Yes, the moral sentiment is certainly coming
to its rights.

Of Unitarianism, after what has been said, it is
unnecessary to speak. That there should be a difference
between the East and the West is natural.
-----File: 262.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
The East holds fast, in large sense, to the ancient
theological traditions. The West never had them,
and can therefore declare that its fellowship is conditioned
on no doctrinal tests, and can welcome all
who wish to establish truth and righteousness and
love in the world. The West will ultimately prevail;
the temper of the East is rapidly wasting
away, and the breach will soon be closed up. The
new Unitarian churches will be founded on a practical
basis, the only requirement being that the minister
should be deeply in earnest about religious
things. The characteristic of all churches, of whatever
name, is an urgent interest in social reform, a
deep concern for the disfranchised and oppressed,
and a warm feeling towards the elevation of mankind.
The universal prayer is, to borrow the pithy
language of Dr. F. H. Hedge: "May Thy kingdom
come on earth!" not "May we come into Thy
kingdom."

If it was hard to do full justice to Thomas Paine, it
is harder to do full justice to the Broad Churchman.
There is no authoritative account of his position to
which appeal can be made, and the great variety of
opinion on incidental points makes it difficult to
frame any description which the leaders would accept.
A great deal depends on the change of circumstances,
the ruling spirit of the time, the prevailing tendencies
of thought in the period,--whether scientific,
critical, or social,--and a great deal depends, too, on
the peculiarities of individual temperament, but the
-----File: 263.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
fundamental doctrines are the same. The ordinary
observer can see the largeness, sympathy, inclusiveness,
devotion to actual needs. But the ordinary
observer cannot see the real basis of faith in human
nature; the manifestation of the Divine Being in the
highest possibilities of man; the trust in a living,
active, communicating God.

These are cardinal points, and must be insisted
on. The inherent depravity of man; his essential
corruption; his absolute inability to receive any portion
of the divine life, is naturally repudiated. But
his feebleness, crudeness, imperfection, his dearth
and deficiency, his sensuality, hardness, love of material
things, is insisted on, and cannot be exaggerated.
Still there is a germ of the divine nature in him, a
spark of the divine flame which can be kindled.
The familiar language of Longfellow expresses this
idea exactly:

/*
"Ye whose hearts are fresh and simple,
Who have faith in God and Nature,
Who believe that in all ages
Every human heart is human,
That in even savage bosoms
There are longings, yearnings, strivings
For the good they comprehend not,
That the feeble hands and helpless,
Groping blindly in the darkness,
Touch God's right hand in that darkness
And are lifted up and strengthened:--
Listen to this simple story."
*/

To this nature, thus receptive, God addresses
Himself. He is the Father, the absolute Love, and
his desire is to lead men upward towards the height
-----File: 264.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
of divine perfection. In all ages, in every way, he
has been trying to do this; and all nature, all art,
all literature is full of this affection for his child.
Even the Pagan myths express this striving of God
with man. The existence of what we call evil is
assumed, but there is no attempt to explain it or
theorize about it or reconcile it with any mode of
philosophy. To us it may be simply the divine effort
to startle the soul into a consciousness of itself.
Even the worst forms of doubt, of denial, of atheism
may be parts of this divine effort; even men like
Strauss and Feuerbach may be witnesses for truth, because
they drive men back in horror from the pit of
disbelief, and compel them to take refuge through
tears and prayers in the supreme love. Of absolute
evil we cannot be sure that there is any; so many
ways must the infinite spirit have to awaken men to
a sense of their own destiny.

I cannot better convey my thought than by recounting
the essence of two sermons that I heard
some years ago from eminent preachers in different
American cities; the first was on the death of
Charles Darwin. After a very ornate service, the
minister dwelt enthusiastically on the merits of
Darwin as a philosopher, described his system, and
declared that his own belief in the Deity of Christ,
was confirmed in large measure by Darwin's theory
of the Selection of the Fittest. The statement was
startling at first, for the two doctrines seemed to
point in opposite directions, but the speaker prob-*
-----File: 265.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
*ably meant that the Christ expressed all the potentialities
of human nature; that he was the Fittest;
not a miracle, not an exception to humanity, but the
perfection of man; in other words, a divine person.
The other sermon turned on the murder of Sisera
(Judges iv, 18), as contrasted with a statement in the
first epistle of John (iv, 8), "God is love." The rector
spoke of the assassination of Sisera in terms of extreme
abhorrence; called it treacherous, cruel, base,
and then said: "See what progress the human mind
has made from this period to that when John was
written." The common impression is that the <i>human</i>
mind had nothing to do with it, it being the <i>divine</i>
mind that was alone in question. But what the
preacher meant was evidently this,--either that the
divine mind dropped thoughts into the human mind
as fast as they could be appreciated, or that the
human mind, imperfect in development, apprehended
all that it could of the perfect mind. Whichever
case we assume, the integrity of the divine mind is
secured, and at the same time the growth of the
human.

At this point, the conception of the Broad Churchman's
idea of the inspiration of the Scripture must
be dwelt upon, for the doctrine is very remarkable,
and throws a flood of light upon his whole conception
of the aim and purpose of Christianity. According
to the common notion, the Bible is literally
the word of God, and men have nothing to do but
to submit themselves to its authority. They must
-----File: 266.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
suppress all natural desires, all dictates of their
moral sense, to this supreme standard of truth and
rectitude. According to this notion, the whole of
man, as a thoroughly corrupted being, is <i>subject</i>, in
obedience to this law. The second theory, adopted
by the American Broad Churchman, holds that the
Bible <i>contains</i> the word of God; and this implies
that there may be a part of the Bible that is not the
word of God, and opens the way to an indefinite
amount of criticism, speculation, and doubt. The
English Broad Churchman holds, as I understand it,
the common doctrine, but with this immense difference.
That whereas, according to the common notion,
the Bible is the word of God, he maintains that
the whole object of the Bible is to educate and uplift
man. The word is a minister to human needs.
Through it, God is trying in various ways, by
history, biography, tale, and song, to warn, persuade,
teach, inspire the human soul. Sometimes he can
do nothing but startle, shame, provoke; and the
very things we find fault with may be designed
for moral education. The Bible, itself, encourages
this idea. Does not Paul preach reconciliation?
Does not John speak of God as love? God hardened
the heart of Pharaoh in order that he might
show that He was stronger than Pharaoh. Jacob was
not altogether a lovely character, but the Lord wrestled
with him and lamed him, thus showing his own
disapproval of the patriarch's temper. David was a
seducer, adulterer, and murderer, but he <i>repented</i>, was
-----File: 267.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
ashamed, was sorrowful, and this repentance made
him a man after God's own heart. It was not that
God <i>approved</i> of his conduct, but that he wanted to
make us <i>disapprove</i> of it. In like manner Luther
based his faith on the Bible, because it convicted
him of sin, and drove him to seek refuge for himself
in Christ. The Church as an organization has always
this one purpose in view--to minister to the soul
of man. The "Articles" fairly throbbed with this
conception. The outrage committed by the "Evangelicals,"
men who insist upon everlasting punishment
and talk of doom, consists in their overlooking
this divine purpose towards humanity.

The <i>doctrines</i> of the Church--the Deity of Christ,
the Incarnation, the Resurrection, the Ascension--bear
this testimony, and are inexplicable without it.
But these doctrines simply convey one thought.
The Christ must be God, otherwise he could not
exemplify the perfect love; he must be Incarnate,
otherwise he could not mingle with men. His Resurrection
teaches his absolute triumph over death; his
Ascension is a pledge of his union with God and his
perpetual intercourse with God's children.

The two <i>rites</i>, Baptism and Communion, give the
same idea. Baptism imports a recognition of the duty
to lead a Christian life; and Communion imports
a wish, on the part of all who partake of it, to enter
into the privilege of a perfect harmony with Christ.
None of these points are reached by criticism, or any
array of texts, though passages may be cited in con-*
-----File: 268.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
*firmation of them. But the proof is derived from
experience, from the felt need of enlightenment and
inspiration, from prayer and the yearning after eternal
life. No doubt it is taken for granted that neither
the Bible nor the Church expresses the <i>whole</i> word
of God. The word is as large as the divine love,
and this is infinite. The complete word of God
includes all nature, all history, and all life.

It will be understood that the Broad Church notion
is only a theory and rests entirely on its reasonableness.
It is simply a modification of Episcopalianism,
and none but an Episcopalian would be likely
to adopt it. Its interest for us consists in its <i>human</i>
character, in its earnestness for social reform, in its
passionate desire to make conscience and justice and
freedom of the Spirit supreme in all human affairs.
It is essentially an ethical system with an ecclesiastical
addition and a heavenly purpose.

There is certainly a great difference between the
Broad Church in America and the Broad Church in
England; there are no Thirty-Nine Articles in this
country; there is no National Church. The Broad
Churchman here is still a Churchman, but the system
is much more elastic and much more intellectual.
The Church is to him also a divine institution, but
not a final establishment; and it becomes divine by
virtue of its helpfulness in imparting the divine life
and its power of human service. The sacraments
have become symbols, venerable from their antiquity,
but more venerable from their use. The Broad
-----File: 269.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
Churchman is an orthodox believer, but he accepts
only the simplest creeds, and he interprets them in
accordance with the rational principles of thought,
and with his fundamental conception of Christianity,
holding not to the written letter, but to the real
meaning of the Confession. This meaning is, he
maintains, easily reconcilable with the idea that all
revelation is made to a living mind,--whether that
of a race or an individual,--and that the Bible is
merely the record of it. No <i>book</i>, in his estimation, can
be inspired. This, coupled with a belief in the unlimited
progress of the natural conscience, brings the
system within the category of modern arrangements.

The idea that man is <i>developed</i> into the divine
life, not <i>converted</i> to it, seems to be the heart of the
system. The writings of F. D. Maurice are full of
it. He said that he did not know what the Broad
Church was, and disclaimed any position in it; yet
he is its reputed father, and certainly held its cardinal
doctrine. This was the soul of his teaching;
this dictated his likes and his dislikes; this animated
his dissent from the Evangelicals on the one hand
and the Rationalists on the other; this made him
cling to the "Articles"; this made him love the
Church. I cannot better convey my notion of the
Broad Churchman's credence than by quoting some
passages from Maurice:

/#
I think that the <i>ground-work of this thought</i> and this
humanity <i>is laid bare</i> in the Thirty-nine Articles; <i>that for
#/
-----File: 270.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
/#
<i>that ground-work</i> [namely, the living God, the living Word] all
our different schools are trying to produce feeble and crumbling
substitutes; that we must recur to it if we would pass
the narrow dimensions of Calvinism, Anglicanism, Romanism;
if we would learn what a message we have for Jews, Mahometans,
Brahmins, Buddhists, for all the nations of the earth, as
well as our poor people at home.

I cannot doubt that this belief [the confession of a God,
who was, and is, and is to come] is latent in every man now;
that we are all living, moving, having our being in this God,
and that He does reveal Himself to His creatures gradually,
before He is revealed in His fulness of glory.

I do perceive that if I have any work in the world, it is to
bear witness of this name [the name of the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost], not as expressing certain relations, however
profound, in the divine nature, but as the underground
of all fellowship among men and angels, as that which will at
last bind all into one, satisfying all the craving of the reason
as well as of the heart, meeting the desires and intuitions that
are scattered through all the religions of the world.

The Church must either fulfil its witness of the redemption
for mankind or be cut off. And I cannot help thinking
that a time is at hand when we shall awaken to this conviction,
and when we shall perceive that what we call our individual
salvation means nothing, and that our faith in it becomes
untenable when we separate it from the salvation which Christ
wrought out for the world by His incarnation and sacrifice,
resurrection and ascension.

He has been pleased to reveal to me in His Son the
brightness of His glory, His absolute love. On that point I
have a right to be certain; he who says I have not, rejects the
Bible and disbelieves the incarnation of the Lord. I will not
give up an inch of this ground; it is a matter of life and
death.

By baptism we claim the position which Christ has claimed
for all mankind ... More and more I am led to ask
#/
-----File: 271.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
/#
myself what a Gospel to mankind must be, whether it must
not have some other ground than the fall of Adam and the
sinful nature of man ... No doctrine can be so at
variance as this, with the notion that it is a Gospel which
men have need of, and in their inmost hearts are craving for.
#/

Why is not this system sufficient? Simply because
the claim that Christ is God, does not seem made
out to severely critical minds. Such as these must
hold even the Broad Church to be a mythology,
beautiful and innocent, but still a mythology.
The word "mythology" implies no disparagement.
A mythology is simply the poetical form of an idea,
and takes its character from the nature of the ideas
it represents. The pagan mythology is on this
account very different from the Christian, and a
mythology that has universal love as its basis may
well be called innocent and beautiful. To the
doctrine of trinity, philosophically considered, even
Unitarian scholars make no objection. What they
cannot accept is the deity of Jesus as an historical
person. The Christ is not, in their opinion, an
historical person, but a doctrine, not identical with
the man of the New Testament. The Divine Being
has never, in their estimation, appeared on earth.
They only who can put aside criticism, can suppress
it, can regard it but as one of many manifestations
of mind, can fix their eyes on a church for society at
large and not for individuals, will be likely to accept
it, and they will on the ground that it is altogether
human, a church for mankind.
-----File: 272.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------

The last phase in the development of the moral
sentiment is represented by the "Ethical Societies."
It is natural that the origin of these should be
Jewish, for the Jews are unencumbered by the mysteries
of the Christian theology; their genius is for
social organization, and the moral element is very
large in their religion. It is natural, too, that the
system should be purer here than in England. Some
of the members of the "Cambridge Ethical Society"
are members of the Church of England, and have to
be warned not to set themselves needlessly in opposition
to the work of the Christian churches. The
"Edinburgh Ethical Club" is mainly a debating
society. In America it is usual to have a lecturer,
and stated services on Sunday. But these services are
very simple, nay, even bare; there is no prayer, and no
scripture, no architecture or art or poetry; but there is
an intense earnestness, nay, enthusiasm, for social reform.
There are kindergartens for the poor children
of the streets, there are classes for the untaught,
libraries for the workingmen, plans for better lodging
and employment for the families of artisans. There is
no fixed doctrine in regard to the origin of the moral
sentiments, lest any should be alienated; the object
being to combine all who have at heart the moral
interests of mankind. The peculiarity of these societies
is not so much that they lay emphasis on the
moral as distinct from the spiritual interests, or aim
to break down the dividing line between Religion
and Ethics, as it is that they rest upon conscience
-----File: 273.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
as the supreme authority, that they assume its practical
function, build upon it as the one and only thing
absolutely known. There is no pretence of following,
even at a distance, the charities of the old
churches with their vast funds, their immense organizations,
their heaps of tracts, their legions of missionaries,
all employed in calling unbelievers into
the fold. The object is to elevate all mankind by
appealing to their moral instincts, on the ground of
their inherent ability to rise in the scale of being.

To make their position clear let me quote the
words of the founder of these societies, contained in
an article entitled "The Freedom of Ethical Fellowship,"
in the first number of the <i>International
Journal of Ethics</i>:

/#
It is the aim of the Ethical Societies to extend the area of
moral co-operation so as to include a part, at least, of the
inner moral life; to unite men of divers opinions and beliefs
in the common endeavor to explore the field of duty; to gain
clearer perceptions of right and wrong; to study with thoroughgoing
zeal the practical problems of social, political, and
individual ethics, and to embody the new insight in manners
and institutions ...

It would be a wrong and a hindrance to the further extension
of truth to raise above our opinions the superstructure of
a social institution. For institutions in their nature are conservative;
they dare not, without imperilling their stability,
permit a too frequent inspection or alteration of their foundations....
The subject part of mankind, in most places,
might, with Egyptian bondage expect Egyptian darkness, were
not the candle of the Lord set up by himself in men's minds,
which it is impossible for the breath or power of man wholly
#/
-----File: 274.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
/#
to extinguish. It is to this "candle of the Lord set up in
men's minds" that we look for illumination. It is in the light
which it sheds that we would read the problems of conduct
and teach others to read them. We appeal directly to
the conscience of the present age, and of the civilized portion
of mankind. There remains as a residue a common deposit
of moral truth, a common stock of moral judgments, which
we may call the common conscience. It is upon this common
conscience that we build ... The contents of the common
conscience we would clarify and classify, to the end that
they may become the conscious possession of all classes; and
in order to enrich and enlarge the conscience, the method we
would follow is to begin with cases in which the moral judgment
is already clear, the moral rule already accepted; and
to show that the same rule, the same judgment, applies to other
cases, which, because of their greater complexity, are less
transparent to the mental eye ...

And here it may be appropriate to introduce a few reflections
on the relations of moral practice to ethical theory in
religious belief. To many it will appear that the logic of our
position must lead us to underestimate the value of philosophical
and religious doctrines in connection with morality, and
that, having excluded this from our basis of fellowship, we
shall inevitably drift into a crude empiricism. I may be permitted
to say that precisely the opposite is at least our aim, and
that among the objects we propose to ourselves, none are
dearer than the advancement of ethical theory and the
upbuilding of religious conviction. The Ethical Society is
a society of persons who are bent on being taught clearer
perceptions of right and wrong, and being shown how to
improve conduct. At least, let us hasten to add, the ideal
of the society is that of a body of men who shall have this
bent. Is it vain to hope that there will in time arise those who
will render them the service they require ...

It is safe to say that every step forward in religion was due
to a quickening of the moral impulses; that moral progress
#/
-----File: 275.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
/#
is the condition of religious progress; that the good life is the
soil out of which the religious life grows. The truths of religion
are chiefly two,--that there is a reality other than that of
the senses, and that the ultimate reality in things is, in a sense
transcending our comprehension, akin to the moral nature of
men. But how shall we acquaint ourselves with this super-*sensible?
The ladder of science does not reach so far. And
the utmost stretch of the speculative reason cannot attain to
more than the abstract postulate of an infinite, which, however,
is void of the essential attributes of divinity. Only the
testimony of the moral life can support a vital conviction of
this sort ...

The Ethical Society is friendly to genuine religion anywhere
and everywhere, because it vitalizes religious doctrines
by pouring into them the contents of spiritual meaning ...
A new moral earnestness must precede the rise of larger religious
ideals; for the new religious synthesis which many long
for, will not be a fabrication, but a growth. It will not steal
upon us as a thief in the night, or burst upon us as lightning
from the sky, but will come in time as a result of the gradual,
moral evolution of modern society, as the expression of higher
moral aspirations, and a response to deeper moral needs.
#/

In his famous essay on "Worship," Emerson says:

/#
There will be a new church founded on moral science, at
first cold and naked, a babe in a manger again, the algebra
and mathematics of ethical law, the church of men to come,
without shawm or psaltery or sackbut; but it will have heaven
and earth for its beams and rafters; science for symbol and
illustration; it will fast enough gather beauty, music, picture,
poetry.
#/

Is this the church that Emerson predicted? It
looks like it. Already we seem to hear the shawms
-----File: 276.png---\\Yosemite_Don\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------
and sackbuts. Already there are desires after a
more rich and melodious administration.

The last number of the <i>International Journal of
Ethics</i> contains two articles: one on "The Inner
Life in Relation to Morality," the other on "The
Ethics of Doubt," which suggest a transcendental
ground for moral beliefs; and they who dissent from
this position surround <i>action</i> with an ideal solemnity.
At all events it is something to see, even at
a distance, a city that hath foundations.
-----File: 277.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------




XVI.

THE RELIGIOUS FUTURE OF AMERICA.


In the <i>Revue des Deux Mondes</i> of October 15,
1860, M. Renan wrote a remarkable article on the
"Future of Religion in Modern Society." This
paper of course dealt largely with questions that
were interesting at that time, but it also contains
very acute observations on the whole subject, which
are of universal concern. His conclusions are that
neither Judaism nor Romanism nor the established
forms of Protestantism will constitute the coming
faith, which must be spiritual (that is, free of space
and time), undogmatical, and enfranchised. "The
religious question," he says, "finds its solution in
liberty ... The liberal principle pre-eminently
is that man has a soul, that he is to be reached only
through the soul, that nothing is of value save as it
effects a change in the soul. An inflexible justice,
granting with inexorable firmness liberty to all, even
to those who, were they masters, would refuse it to
their adversaries, is the only issue that reason discovers
for the grave problems raised in our time."
This essay, along with that of Emile de Laveleye of
-----File: 278.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------
Lige in Belgium, on the "Religious Future of Civilized
Communities," written in 1876, sums up the
whole question. It only remains to apply their principles
to America.

Many dread the prevalence of Roman Catholicism.
I confess I never could share in that apprehension.
For if there is anything certain it is the
unchangeableness of the lines of division that separate
the three great regions of the earth, each having
its own faith. There is the Greek Church, which
rules in Asia; the Latin Church, which is confined
to the Latin races, and is strongest in Southern Italy,
where the people are most ignorant and supine; and
the Protestant Church, which prevails in Northern
Europe among the Germanic nations. As Renan
says:

#/
Nothing will come of the mutual struggle of the three Christian
families; their equilibrium is as well assured as that of
the three great races which share between them the world;
their separation will secure the future against the excessive
predominance of a single religious power, just as the division
of Europe must forever prevent the return of that <i>orbis
romanus</i>, that closed circle, which allowed no possible escape
from the tyranny that unity has engendered.
#/

Moreover, the Roman Catholic faith is essentially
<i>Italian</i>, and as such can have no permanent influence
in Germany, England, or America. The great popes
of the Middle Ages, whose genius raised the papacy to
power and splendor, were Italians. Italy, until a few
years ago, was isolated; not a great political power, as
-----File: 279.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------
it is now, among other powers of Europe, nor drawn
by political affiliations into the schemes of other
dominions. Besides, the Catholic Church had the
advantages of the Italian genius for organization,
command, wisdom in practical affairs. Then, too, it
had the immense benefit of the old Roman treasures
of art, which gave a glory to the system. These
considerations alone would make it impossible that
Romanism, in its foreign form, should ever become
the religion of the United States. There may be
another kind of ecclesiasticism, but without the ancient
authority; an ecclesiasticism which stands for
pomp, ornament, display, beauty, but not for anything
more. There is evidence that every form of
religion here is disposed to take on elements of decoration,--architecture,
music, stained glass, drapery,
pictures, and monuments; but this is only a sign of
increasing wealth, not of increasing subjection.

In addition to all this, the <i>genius</i> of the American
people is strongly against anything like submission
to authority. The love of liberty is exceedingly
powerful. It is claimed that Romanism is not committed
to any form of government, that it is as
favorable to republican institutions as to monarchical;
but this is not the opinion of Renan, who was born
and trained in the church, and who is therefore
entitled to speak with knowledge; nor is it the opinion
of other scholars, Martineau for instance, who
says in his article on the "Battle of the Churches"
(<i>Westminster Review</i>, January, 1851):
-----File: 280.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------

/#
We are convinced it cannot occupy the scope which English
traditions and English usage have secured; that every step it
may make is an encroachment upon wholesome liberty; that
it is innocent only where it is insignificant, and where it is
ascendant will neither part with power nor use it well, and that
it must needs raise to the highest pitch the common vice of
tyranny and democracy,--the relentless crushing of minorities.
#/

But whether this charge of absolutism be just or
not, Romanism has been so long associated as a polity
with monarchical governments that it has contracted
a habit of domineering, and the people can never be
persuaded that the papacy is democratic in its constitution.

Americans are very suspicious, too, of any interference
on the part of the government. If a system
demands an army, a palace, lands, it must pay for
them out of its own private means. A generation
or more ago it was possible for an administration
to give for a merely nominal sum, in the very heart
of a large city, great estates to one denomination.
This is possible no longer. Every sect must vindicate
itself, and stand on its own feet; this alone
would make it impossible for a church so poor as
the Catholic to establish itself in this country on
any terms of supremacy.

The desire for change which is inherent in the
American mind must also prove fatal in the end to
any claim of absolute stability. Protestantism is
therefore better for Americans than Romanism is,
because it is more portable, more various, more accommodating
to popular tastes and inclinations.
-----File: 281.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------

There is no disposition to undervalue the work of
the Catholic Church. Its great saints, its heroic
martyrs, its stupendous missions, its enormous philanthropy,
its influence in educating and controlling
masses of people, cannot be exaggerated; and still
it is destined to wield an immense influence as a
spiritual power over the human race; but it never
again can be the absolute system it once was. However
it may commend itself to certain classes in our
population, it must always be simply one department
in the universal church.

But it will be said that the Catholic Church may
<i>accommodate</i> itself to republican institutions. M.
Renan doubts whether any radical change can be
made. He says:

/#
Catholicism, persuaded that it works for the truth, will always
endeavor to enlist the state in its defence or its spread ...
Catholicism is, in fact, the believer's country, far
more than is the land of his birth. The stronger a religion
is, the more effective it is in this way ... More and
more have Catholics been brought to think that they derive
life and salvation from Rome. It is especially worth remarking
that the new Catholic conquests exhibit the most sensitiveness
on this point. The old provincial Catholic, whose
faith belonged to the soil, has less need of the Pope, and is
much less alarmed at the storms that menace him, than the
new Catholics, who are coming fresh to Catholicism, and regard
the Pope, after the new system, as the author and defender
of their faith ... Catholicism has been seduced
into becoming a religion essentially political. The Pope becomes
the actual sovereign of the church.
#/

But supposing that such an alteration is pos-*
-----File: 282.png---\\mehoo80027\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
*sible, that the church can abase its pretensions to
supremacy over all other sects, that Romanism
simply melts into our society,--in this case, the
papacy, as usually understood, becomes simply a
form of church government like Presbyterianism or
Congregationalism or Episcopacy; Catholicism becomes
a purely spiritual faith, and, as such, is not
only harmless but beneficent.

The religion, therefore, of America cannot be ecclesiastical;
neither can it be dogmatic. I was on
the point of saying <i>theological</i>; but there is a great
difference between theological and dogmatical. Dogmatism
is theology raised to power. Theology there
always must be; some account of the Supreme
Power in the world; some report of the contents
of the Divine Mind. The present indifference to
theology is hardly a good sign, unless it be an indifference
to theology as usually regarded--that is,
to the old systems of theology. The future religion,
for this reason, cannot be Protestantism. For Protestantism
is essentially dogmatical. It claims superiority
to Romanism on the one hand and to infidelity
on the other. Furthermore, it is identified
with the Bible. Now, modern scientific criticism
has so riddled the Bible, that it no longer can serve
as a foundation. And this foundation being taken
away, Protestantism must lose its corner-stone, and
rest entirely on a rational basis. Likewise, Protestantism
encourages sectarianism. It exists, in fact,
only in numerous parties, each jealous of the rest
-----File: 283.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------
and seeking to build up its own establishment without
regard to the well-being of opposing bodies.
There is a dream of unity amid all this diversity.
But such unity can be gained only by the sacrifice
of the very peculiarity of division, and the admission
of certain things which all have in common;
and such a reconciliation, besides the tyranny it engenders,
cannot be desired, as it would be fatal to all
activity. Sectarianism itself, apart from the "hatred,
malice, and uncharitableness" which accompany it,
may not of necessity be an evil; but sectarianism as
it exists now is an evil of very great moment, and
yet, without something of this alienation between
sects Protestantism would decline.

Is Unitarianism then to be the coming religion?
I cannot think so. Unitarianism is but a form of
Protestantism; the most attenuated form. It is
committed to the Bible; held to it indeed by a very
fine thread, but still held to it. No doubt it has
gained greatly in the last years. The annual circulation
of its tracts has risen in twenty-five or thirty
years from fifteen thousand to three hundred thousand
copies. A quarter of a century ago there was
but one Unitarian church on the Pacific coast, now
there are eighteen. A generation since it had, in the
whole region from the Alleghanies to the Rocky
Mountains, only fourteen churches, now there are
ninety; and in the same period, sixty-three new societies
have come into being in the New England
and Middle States. Still, as compared with the
-----File: 284.png---\\mehoo80027\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
great sects, it is very small, and never can be their
rival. And this because, however interesting and
precious it may be to some people, it lacks, and must
ever lack, owing to its critical character, the elements
of a great religion, the passionateness that charms
the people, and the moral enthusiasm that catches
up the few men of genius. The period of "pale
negations" is past; but in proportion as the system
becomes positive it tends more and more towards the
principle that animates the ethical societies, namely,
its supreme devotion to the moral law. Thus it
stands at the beginning, not at the end, of the line
of advance, and has all the work of building up to
do, before it can grow in general influence.

No, the religion of the future in America must be
of the spirit; not merely as being independent of
form and dogma, but as cherishing a great hope for
the soul, and a great aspiration after perfection. No
doubt every spirit must have a form of some kind,
but it need not be a fixed, established, dominant
imposition. M. Renan touched the matter exactly
when commenting on the interview of Jesus with
the woman of Samaria: "Woman, the hour is coming
and now is, when men shall worship neither on this
mountain nor at Jerusalem, but when the true worshippers
shall worship the Father in spirit and in
truth." Renan says:

/#
When the Christ pronounced this word, he became really a
Son of God, and for the first time spoke the word upon which
eternal religion shall repose. He founded the worship with-*
#/
-----File: 285.png---\\mehoo80027\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
/#
*out date, without country, which shall endure to the end of
time. He created a heaven of pure souls, where one finds
what one asks in vain for on the earth, the perfect nobleness
of the children of God, absolute purity, total abstraction from
the impurities of the world, the liberty which has its complete
amplitude only in the world of thought ... The love of God
conceived as the type of all perfection, the love of man, charity,
his whole doctrine is reduced to this; nothing can be less
theological, less sacerdotal, nothing more philosophical, more
profound, or more simple.
#/

The coming religion must also be humane and
social. Intellectual it must certainly be, but it must,
too, be emotional and adoring. There are three implications
in it--a spiritual nature in man, a living
power in the universe, an eternal life of progress
and attainment, and these are assured only by
reason.

The coming religion, we may add, must be Christian
in name, because Christianity as an ideal faith
has worked itself into our common life. It is the
soul of our laws, of our customs, of our institutions.
All assume its authority; all respect its sanction.
The great thinkers of the world conspire in thinking
so. Thus Goethe says:

/#
Let intellectual culture progress; let natural science extend
our knowledge; let the human mind grow; it will never outstrip
the grandeur of Christianity, nor its moral culture.
#/

Strauss, in his essay on "The Transient and Permanent
in Christianity," declares that humanity
never will be without religion; and Laveleye says:
-----File: 286.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------

/#
It is Christianity which has shed abroad in the world the
idea of fellowship, from which issue the aspirations after
equality which threaten the actual social order; it is also the
influence of Christianity which arrests the explosion of this
subversive force, and its principles, better comprised and
better applied, will bring back by degrees peace in society.
#/

Ours is a scientific age. There is a general demand
for knowledge, a desire for demonstrated
truth. Many will believe nothing that they cannot
see with their eyes. In this sense, and in this sense
alone, it is true that facts count for nothing in the
domain of religion. But there are facts of the inner
world that are quite as important as any facts in the
outer world,--facts of the imagination; facts of love;
facts of faith. Nothing is truer than that we are
saved by hope. Science has enlarged the world; has
beautified it; has made it look orderly, harmonious,
poetic; but the realm of the known is very small indeed
as compared with the realm of the unknown,
and the more we discover, the more we find that there
is to discover. The realm of the inner world is immensely
large; and thousands of years must elapse
before we discover its contents, if we ever do. The
language of James Martineau is as true to-day as
it was when the words were spoken, more than fifty
years ago:

/#
Until we touch upon the mysterious, we are not in contact
with religion; nor are any objects reverently regarded by us,
except such as, from their nature or their vastness, are felt to
transcend our comprehension ... The station which
the soul occupies when its devout affections are awakened, is
#/
-----File: 287.png---\\mehoo80027\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
/#
always this; on the twilight between immeasurable darkness
and refreshing light; on the confines between the seen and
the unseen; where a little is discerned and an infinitude concealed;
where a few distinct conceptions stand in confessed
inadequacy, as symbols of ineffable realities ... And if
this be true, the sense of what we do not know is as essential
to our religion as the impression of what we do know: the
thought of the boundless, the incomprehensible, must blend
in our mind with the perception of the clear and true: the
little knowledge we have must be clung to as the margin of
an invisible immensity; and all our positive ideas be regarded
as the mere float to show the surface of the infinite deep.
#/

Shall I say that some form of theism will be the
religion of America in the future? Not the literal
theism of a generation or more ago, with its individual
God, its contriving Providence, its supplicatory
prayer, its future of retribution; nor yet the
theism of Theodore Parker, of an infinite God revealed
in consciousness, "the Being, infinitely powerful,
infinitely wise, infinitely just, infinitely loving,
and infinitely holy." It well may resemble the system
described by Francis W. Newman in his book
called "Theism," published in London in 1858. In
this work he describes a religion based on conscience,
without regard to any form of professed faith, yet
covering in its theory and practice the whole region
of ideal ethics. Different minds approach the problem
from different directions. Mr. F. E. Abbot
("Scientific Theism," 1885) appeals to science; Josiah
Royce printed a volume in 1885 entitled "The Religious
Aspect of Philosophy," wherein he pursues the
-----File: 288.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------
line of sympathetic thought; James Martineau in
his "Study of Religion" (1888), bases his system
on the moral sense; but all three arrive at the same
point--a supreme mind in creation.

We must be careful not to confound Theism
with Deism, for though both are the same word--one
Greek and one Latin--and mean the same
thing, yet they stand for entirely different conceptions.
Deism is a purely negative system, weighed
down with denials. It is content when it has rejected
what it calls all supernatural adjuncts--miracles,
revelations, an inspired Scripture. Its face is
set towards the past, not toward the future, and it is
simply what is left of the old systems of belief, having
no positive philosophy of its own. But Theism
is a positive, fresh, original faith. It gazes forward,
and builds on the natural consciousness of man,
making no criticism on previous modes of belief.
It is full of hope and enthusiasm, looking towards
something that is before it, not scorning but believing.
All that it needs in order to become a
popular faith is a poetical element, something imaginative,
symbolical, picturesque. The intellectual
requirements it already possesses. It is affirmative;
it is universal.

Neither must this kind of theism be identified
with natural religion, unless natural religion be
made to comprehend facts of the inner as well as
the outer world--facts of psychology as well as
of physiology; facts of mind as well as of body.
-----File: 289.png---\\mehoo80027\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
Such a theism is not a mere reminiscence, either, of
an ancient faith; for every form of mediatorial religion,
however modified, simplified, "enlightened,"
as it is called, leaves something of its temper behind
it. The intellect is haunted by old modes of truth;
the heart lingers around the ancient places of reverence;
the conscience refers to some antique authority;
the soul cannot pray except in the language of
a pater-noster or a psalm. A scent as of roses may
hang round the human mind; but the roses will be
grown in some garden of the East, not in ours. Such
a theism as I am thinking of will be grounded in
Ethical Law. You may call it "Christian," if you
will, because the word <i>Christian,/i> expresses the highest
form of the moral sentiment, and carries a supreme
authority to the human conscience; but on the
<i>human conscience</i> it must rest. It will be a noble,
pure faith, giving a welcome to all knowledge,
bright with anticipation, warm with enthusiasm.
As John Weiss has said so much better than I
can what I mean, I will quote a passage from him.
It occurs in "American Religion" (page 67):

/#
Cannot the power which sustains, without budging from the
spot, my personal vitality, sustain and nourish the immediate
conscience of which that vitality makes me aware? I cannot
hurt my health, nor tell a lie, nor commit a fraud, nor strike
my brother, nor leave the beggar in the ditch, nor parade my
superiorities, without knowing it by direct intimation. My
pains are its rebukes, my delights its sympathies, my hopes its
suggestions, my sacrifices its impost, my heavenly longings its
apology for haunting me forever. There is a power in which
#/
-----File: 290.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------
/#
I live and move and have my being, in which I eat, drink,
breathe, sleep, wake, love and hate, marry, and protect a home.
Is it incapable of sustaining all my functions of true religion
on the spot as well as these? Do I have these without a
mediator, and must I travel for the rest? When I undertake
to breathe by tradition it will be time for me to get a sense of
God in the same way.
#/

The Dignity of Human Nature must be our watchword;
of human <i>nature</i>, not of human <i>character</i>.
For human <i>nature</i> denotes the <i>capacities</i> of man,
what he <i>ought</i> to be and <i>shall</i> be, not what he <i>is</i>.
Human character expresses only the undeveloped
condition of man, and is therefore not to be taken as
a final stand. This doctrine does not belong to a
sect or a church, but to all mankind. It assumes an
entirely new conception of the basis of religious
faith; it makes a new beginning; it starts a new
system; it exactly reverses the ancient order of
thought, and builds up from a completely original
foundation.

The weightiest objections proceed from the undeveloped
character of man. For example, the common
saying that conscience is crude, confused, either does
not exist at all, or erects inconsistent standards of
right and wrong. But if a high criterion of morality
is established, as it is, it has an educating and sustaining
power. Every saint attests it; all the bibles
of the world voice it; revelation owes to it its authority.
Great souls do but raise the common level
on which common souls tread; as the discovery of
-----File: 291.png---\\mehoo80027\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
the ancient pavements in the Forum at Rome opens
to ordinary feet the way that statesmen and heroes
went. When I was in Salem, a young man who was
very much addicted to drink, being remonstrated
with, urged that he could not help it, that he was
born so, just as another was born to praise and pray.
His appetite for ardent spirits was just as natural to
him as the preacher's appetite for spiritual things.
His argument could not be refuted, but I always
thought that in his hours of reflection, if he had any,
he must have despised himself. At all events, the
outside observer would class him with a lower order
of humanity; the fixed rule of conscience being a
universal judge.

Again, the slowness of moral advance is flung in
our teeth; the stubbornness of vice and evil. But
we must give time for improvement and cultivation.
All good things must wait--coal, petroleum, gas,
electricity; the fertilizing qualities of guano were
known and announced a full generation before the
industrial world acted on the discovery; now millions
of dollars are made by its importation. We
are so used to thinking of the globe as round, and of
men as living at the antipodes just as we live here,
that we cannot believe that once it was deemed impossible
for human creatures to live with their heads
downward and their feet upward, and to walk like
flies upon a ceiling. None but hopelessly crazy or
foolish people were supposed to entertain such a
notion. So the time will come when it shall be as
-----File: 292.png---\\mehoo80027\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
natural for men to do right as to breathe; when all
kinds of injustice, cruelty, and tyranny will be instinctively
abandoned. When that time does come,
men will be unable to believe that the ages ever
were when men could make brutes of themselves or
brutally treat each other. An eminent divine, commenting
on a passage in Matthew, xviii., 15--"Moreover,
if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go
and tell him his fault between him and thee alone;
if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.
But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or
two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses
every word may be established. And if he shall
neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: but if he
neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as a
heathen man and a publican,"--said: "This is equivalent
to saying, 'You must begin all over again;
must start fresh from the beginning.'" This was
very bad exegesis, but it was excellent morality;
even the "heathen man and the publican" holds in
his bosom all the possibilities of human nature; and
we are bound to believe that in time the like of him
may be saintly.

The decline of faith in religion, the passion for
material things--money, fame, luxury,--is often cited
as a proof that man is going downward; but may
not this be a simple return to honesty and a rudimental
integrity; a disposition to depend on one's
self, and not on any mediator or redeemer? Let us
build then in hope and faith, for, after all, these are
-----File: 293.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------
the great architects. A listener to an eminent divine
once said that when he got up to speak a radiance
seemed to grow round his head; the great walls of a
temple seemed to rise above him; the audience was
composed of all nations, all sorts and conditions of
men, and a choir of seraphs made the music; and
yet this man spoke in a small, low-browed hall to a
scanty audience, and the hymns were badly sung by
a voluntary company. Such power has a great conviction;
and when a deep conviction like that is extended
and confirmed, the visible church will match
the invisible, and shepherds will again hear the
songs of angels.
-----File: 294.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------




XVII.

CONFESSIONS.


The course of spiritual advance is traced with difficulty
and hesitation. It is the most obscure phase
of the general problem of progress, which is almost
insoluble. There are so many currents and counter-currents;
so many tributaries; so many swift torrents
and still bays; so many times the stream seems moving
in the opposite direction--it is not surprising if some
have concluded that there was no progress at all,
that we only moved in a circle, went over the same
ground again and again, and even marched backwards;
what some counted gain others counted loss.
A keen examination suggests that on the whole advance
has been made, allowance being conceded for
many a turn and variation.

The law of evolution may be considered established,
but the method of evolution is hidden. The
law of hereditary descent may be admitted, and yet
the lines of hereditary descent are by no means obvious.
Tendencies may even run in parallel lines,
may aid each other, may confuse each other, may
neutralize each other, may go very far or lie close at
-----File: 295.png---\\mehoo80027\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
hand, and in any individual instance it is almost impossible
to find how they work.

In my own case the inferences of temperament
followed each other. During the first fifty years
of my life I was mainly under the influence of my
father's temperament. I sang, wrote hymns and
poems, sent pieces to the papers, was sanguine,
inclined to take a happy view of all experiences;
but at the same time I was conscious of another
train of thought which struggled fitfully with the
first, acquiring more and more power until at last it
gained the ascendency, and I found myself more
inclined to conservatism, as it is called, to a grave,
sober, serious regard for existing institutions and
modes of opinion. It is said that this might have been
the effect of years, inasmuch as after middle life one
is very apt to experience a change of sentiment. But
in my own case time will hardly explain the phenomenon,
for long before I came to middle age I
was aware of this less hopeful tendency in my constitution.
It was my mother's influence succeeding my
father's. And though it never entirely prevailed, I
can see how it may have shadowed my visions of
the future. And it makes me somewhat distrustful
of the entire sanity of my criticism. I am afraid of
not being hopeful enough.

I have sometimes suspected myself of a too critical
disposition, a propensity to discover defects in men
and opinion, to look at the dark side of systems
that were repudiated; and in the effort to correct
-----File: 296.png---\\terrio\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------
the aberrations of a literal estimate I may have gone
too far in the opposite direction, rendering more than
justice to antagonistic doctrines. But this, if it was
an error, was certainly not an error to be ashamed of.
For say what we will, the partial man is not the
whole man, nor is cold perception true perception.
There must be sympathy in every act of judgment,
as Dr. Diman wisely wrote ("The Theistic Argument,"
p. 32): "In the pursuit of the highest truth
not one faculty but all faculties need to be enlisted."
Every system, however formal or dogmatical it may
have become, had in the beginning its spiritual aspect;
it was piously, if not humanely, meant;
and in order to be rightly comprehended, should
be surveyed from the inside. The most repulsive
doctrine has something to urge in its favor, and it is
the duty of the true rationalist to find out what it
may be.

If the inclination to take a common-sense view of
opinions was derived from my mother's side, a strong
democratic bent was primarily due to her. My
grandfather was a poor boy who earned his fortune
by the simple qualities of industry, integrity, perseverance,
independence, faithfulness, honesty,--virtues
which he bequeathed to his children. These inherited
dispositions were encouraged by the social
influences of the public school, which, in spite of
its laborious method of imparting a knowledge of
Latin and Greek, threw the lads together, thus
breaking down artificial distinctions; and also by my
-----File: 297.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------
experience at Harvard College, where scholarship
was associated with mere manhood, and was cultivated
by youth of all conditions. The anti-slavery
agitation was a practical instructor in humanity,
indicating as it did the widest sympathy of race.
An assumption of the essential identity of all sorts
of mind was a cardinal principle of transcendentalism,
while my later experiences confirmed these early
tendencies. My societies in Jersey City and New
York were popular in their composition. The "Free
Religious Association" was based on universal sentiments.
The clerical profession was, in my day,
broadly human, so that aristocratic proclivities
had small hope of prevailing. In fact, the lessons
which I learned from R. W. Emerson and Wendell
Phillips sank deeply in, and became clearer as years
went on.

One can hardly say that learning is retrogressive
when one thinks of Dr. Dllinger, of Germany;
Ernest Renan, of France; Benjamin Jowett, Arthur
P. Stanley, James Martineau, of England; but erudition
must, as a rule, be conservative; for it associates
the mind directly with the past, binds one
down to facts of history, and lays great stress on
the testimony of evidence. It still is true that
abundance of luggage is a sign that one is far from
home. And they who can move quickly with all
this weight upon them must have extraordinary
genius.

An indifference to dogma is also characteristic of
-----File: 298.png---\\mehoo80027\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
a speculative reformer; and I cannot recollect the
time when I cared much for doctrinal differences.
All questions were to me open questions. I had
doubts about everything, and never suffered acute
pain from such doubts. The influence of Jesus, the
immortality of the soul, the existence of God, were
always exposed to misgivings. Everything active
was interesting to me, whether it looked toward
"radicalism" or not. This was an advantage, not
merely because it saved me from suffering, but because
it enabled me to face all emergencies.

But some one will say: Does not the love of truth
count for anything? Yes, undoubtedly it does.
But lovers of truth do not by any means belong to
the same school, or look for light from the same
quarter; some are Romanists, some Protestants;
some have no religion at all. Lovers of truth are
found in all denominations, from Calvinist to Unitarian,
from Christian to Buddhist. Truth exists
for us in layers. There are truths of the letter and
truths of the spirit; there is truth to fact, and truth
to fancy; there is truth to the individual soul, and
truth to the public conscience; there is truth to the
heart, to the moral sense, to the spiritual intuition:
but it will not do to charge lack of truthfulness
upon anybody simply because he does not hold the
same opinion with ourselves. M. Renan somewhere
says that in order to judge a system one must have
been in it as a disciple, and outside of it as a critic.
But then only a very extraordinary person can do
-----File: 299.png---\\terrio\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------
this. As a disciple he must be earnest, intelligent,
devoted; as a critic he must be without prejudice,
without animosity, and without guile. Thus the
point of view must of necessity be individual. There
can be no general or absolute standard of judgment.
One thing only is certain: the fact of spiritual progress;
but what constitutes this progress nobody
can tell. Since 1822 till now the change in <i>Unitarianism</i>
has been immense, and it has consisted in the
gradual supremacy of reason over tradition, but it
has been almost too sudden and too swift. Progress
had better be slow, in order that it may be sure.
One step at a time, for the reason that only one
step at a time can be taken safely. We must not
jump at conclusions. There must be unbounded
catholicity of thought, but it must not be made up
of indifference, concession, and idle compliance.

Experience has taught me many things--this
among others, that there is no final criterion of
truth, not criticism, or "science," or philosophy, or
liberty. There is no question any more of "destructive"
and "constructive." The Supreme Power
is always constructive, and the Supreme Power is
sure at last to prevail. There is an old Greek fable,
that Apollo once challenged Jupiter to shoot. The
sun-god shot an arrow to the very confines of the
earth; then Jupiter, at one stride, reached the limits
of creation, and said, "Where shall I shoot?" We
are not Jupiters; we are not Apollos; but we can
take our stand and shoot our arrows a little way into
-----File: 300.png---\\mehoo80027\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
the dark. The utmost we can do is to be steadfast
in our own places; be faithful to our own calling;
draw our own shaft to the head. Father Hecker
said a brave thing to me when, on declining my request
that he would speak before the Free Religious
Association, he took the ground that in a few weeks
Catholicism would enter Boston in triumph. I honored
the Broad Churchman, who said to me once
that he always preached Christ as an historical
person, and wished he had a church big enough to
hold all humanity; and I admired the Presbyterian
clergyman who commended the sincerity of Dr.
Briggs, whom some regarded as a heretic. Fidelity
to one's own word and gift is the one thing needful
here.

Whether it be the tendency of modern thought,
or whether it be not, to abandon the Christian religion
and cast discredit on every kind of faith held
by the churches and professors throughout the
world, cannot, in this generation, be decided. In
any event, we shall not be left desolate. For nature
will remain, with its unfathomable resources of use
and beauty. The mind will remain, with its infinite
faculties of reason and imagination. The heart will
remain, with its insatiable affections and desires.
Conscience will remain, with its sense of duty. The
sentiments of awe, wonder, admiration, worship,
will not expire. The reconstructive powers will
still be active, and every creative quality will continue
in full operation. Knowledge, literature, art,
-----File: 301.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------
will live and flourish in new manifestations; and no
original capacity will lie unemployed.

We should have learned by this time that nothing
dies before its hour has come; that processes of recuperation
keep even pace with processes of decay;
that forms alone perish while principles endure;
that living things become more mighty and glorious
as they throw off encumbrances; that strength always
in the end accompanies simplicity.

The idea of God has passed through several
phases, and each new phase has been a gain. The
deity who was an individual has become a person;
the attributes of personality, as commonly understood,
have disappeared, so that pantheism has succeeded
to a mechanical theism; God has become a
name for our most exalted feelings, so that instead of
saying "God is Spirit," some read "Spirit is God";
yet the ancient reverence more than persists, is on
the increase. And if the course of disintegration of
the old clumsy conception should go on, there need
be no apprehension that loving veneration will
decline.

The future life is no longer associated with retribution,
and immortality means opportunity instead
of doom. Should the doctrine of moral influence
follow upon the doctrine of spiritual progression, the
essential significance of the tenet would be preserved,
for that is ethical not individual.

Prayer, too, is no more a begging for favors, or an
act of intercession. Supplication for outward bene-*
-----File: 302.png---\\mehoo80027\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
*fits has given place to petition for spiritual gifts, and
this to pure aspiration, the desire for excellence;
still the soul's passion is as deep as ever, perhaps
deeper.

If Mr. Tyndall's prophecy should be fulfilled, and
we should come to "discover in that matter which we,
in our ignorance, and notwithstanding our professed
reverence for its Creator, have hitherto covered with
opprobrium, the promise and potency of every form
and quality of life," then what we call matter would
simply assume new properties commensurate with
novel tasks. The properties themselves will remain
as they were, and will in nowise change their peculiarity.
The ancient attributes of mind will persist,
whatever theory of their origin be adopted. The
old sanctities will endure, and the burden of responsibility
will fall upon another pair of shoulders.

Thus every virtue will be maintained in complete
vigor,--reverence, aspiration, trust, submission, confidence,
serenity, patience, fortitude,--and nothing
will be lost.

Then there is the social world, in which we "live
and move and have our being." This "encompasses
us behind and before, and lays its hand upon us."
There is not an hour in the day, hardly a moment of
the hour, when the call of duty is not made upon us.
None but the rarest spirits discharge the claims of
mercy and brotherhood; people generally do not
know what they are; repudiate them when presented.
The preachers have more than they can do to induce
-----File: 303.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------
practice of even the commonest virtues of good will.
Humanity, in its grand aspects, is left to the writers
of Utopias. Not a day passes that conscience is
not over-worked, even when it is not perplexed by
misgivings in regard to the amount or the kind of
service it ought to render. Some have sought an
escape in the immortal life from the demands of this;
and some have denied the doctrine of another world
because it drew attention away from this, and made
the ills of the present seem light in view of some
coming beatitude. In truth, the friends of that great
hope will do well to remember that it is identical
with moral attainment; that it is for great souls;
that

/*
The life of heaven above,
Springs from the life below.
*/

It is, to say the least, doubtful whether any future
life can do more than ripen seeds that are sowed
here, or whether spiritual perfection will owe anything
essential to other events of time, while it is
certain that nothing is sure to abide but what is
born of love.

Unless the doctrine of a future life can be used to
reinforce the doctrine of moral attainment in the
present state of existence, its power must depart.
The cords of personal affection are not strong
enough to hold the belief. The true inference from
disbelief is not expressed in the words, "Let us eat
and drink for tomorrow we die"; but in these, "I
must work while it is day." This idea is a very old
-----File: 304.png---\\mehoo80027\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
one. The air was full of it when I was a youth.
It was the soul of all liberal faith. The <i>Westminster
Review</i>, which was in full force in my early manhood,
having begun in 1824, two years after my
birth, was animated by it. The <i>Prospective Review</i>,
the organ of the spiritual Unitarians, and edited by
such men as James Martineau, John James Taylor,
John Hamilton Thom, and Charles Wicksteed,
a magazine aiming to "interpret and represent Spiritual
Christianity in its character of the Universal
Religion," was started about 1845. In its pages
"spirituality" was intimately associated with "humanity."
The books of F. W. Newman, "The
Soul" (1849); "Phases of Faith" (1850); "Catholic
Union" (1854), teemed with this conception. The
charming verses of William Blake, published in
his "Songs of Innocence," had somehow came to my
knowledge.

/*
To mercy, pity, peace, and love,
All pray in their distress;
And to these virtues of delight
Return their thankfulness.

For mercy, pity, peace, and love
Is God, our Father dear;
And mercy, pity, peace, and love
Is man, His child and care.

For mercy has a human heart;
Pity, a human face;
And love, the human form divine
And peace, the human dress.
*/
-----File: 305.png---\\terrio\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------

/*
Then every man of every clime
That prays, in his distress,
Prays to the human form divine
Love, Mercy, Pity, Peace.

And all must love the human form
In Heathen, Turk, or Jew;
Where mercy, love, and pity dwell,
There God is dwelling too.
*/

In this country the same idea prevailed in the
early period of transcendentalism, and gradually
worked its way into the common heart. Channing
lent it an impulse. His brilliant nephew, William
Henry Channing, exemplified it. The transcendental
preachers all insisted on it. The "Dial" was
charged with it. The most kindling literature of
my growing days drew inspiration from it. Brook
Farm, Fruitlands, and every other attempt at
association was built upon it. Modern socialism
owes to it the fascination it has for the heart; and
we cannot listen to a sermon now that does not
throb with the emotion it excites.

For myself I must confess that I have no interest
in another life, save as it encourages the endeavor
after this human excellence. My mental constitution
makes me insensible to sentimental considerations,
to arguments addressed to private affections.
As my first sermon was about the brotherhood of
man, so my present hope is that love may increase,
and that the reign of theology may be succeeded
by that of charity.
-----File: 306.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------

This was the dream of Abbot Joachim, in the
twelfth century, the Cistercian monk, founder of the
monastery of Floris, author of "The Everlasting
Gospel." It was his notion that the existing era of
Christianity was passing away. According to him,
there were three dispensations, corresponding to the
three persons in the Trinity--that of the Father,
that of the Son, that of the Spirit,--the dispensation
of Awe, the dispensation of Wisdom, and
the dispensation of Love. The first was represented
by Peter, the organizer, the patron saint
of Romanism; the second, by Paul, the preacher
of the Word, the bulwark of Protestantism; the
third by John, the seer, the beloved disciple, the
apostle of love. How much the pious man meant
by this we cannot tell. His own contemporaries
were divided in opinion; but a pretty fair commentary
is furnished, in the fact that his writing
was condemned by two Councils--that of the Lateran
in 1215, and of Arles in 1260,--and that he has
ever since been classed among the mystics--that is,
the unintelligible and the unbalanced in mind.

True the prophecy has not been literally fulfilled,
inasmuch as the first two dispositions are still in
force, and are likely to be for many a day, but the
essence of it has come to pass. Romanism has been
deprived of its temporal authority, and is reduced
to a picturesque form of faith; its disciples easily
throw off its bondage, while its new professors never
put it on. Protestantism is decomposing under the
-----File: 307.png---\\mehoo80027\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------
influence of doubt and criticism. The thought of
brotherhood is extending. I have small faith that
the time will ever come when all people will worship
under one form, or will accept the same mode
of believing. I cannot think that at the name of
Jesus every knee will bow, or that every tongue
will make confession of his Lordship; but I do believe
that the reign of justice and good-will shall be
established. It is a great deal to hope for a time
when the many will submit to the law of reason, becoming
strong enough to withstand the force of
authority in church or creed, and content with
charity.

We have gained much since Joachim's day. We
have acquired knowledge, industry, civilization,
freedom, enterprise, intelligence, the sense of mutual
dependence. The bars of prejudice are being taken
down. Class distinctions are being abolished.
Newly discovered arts are bringing men nearer together,
and weaving the ties of fraternity. All this
is opportunity--opportunity that immediately precedes
performance. When we see the road prepared
for the Spirit, we may be sure that the Spirit itself
is not far off.
-----File: 308.png---\\Goodwit\\fsmwalb\Scribe\----------------------------




INDEX.

/*
A

Abbot, F. E., 117, 282

Abbott, E. A., 256

Abolitionists, 45, 183

Adler, Felix, quoted, 268

Alcott, A. B., 52

Anti-slavery, 44, 46, 49

Arminians, 1

Arnold, M., 13


B

Barnard, F. A. P., 226

Barnard, T., 43

Bartol, C. A., 119

Baur, F. C., 57

Beecher, H. W., 256

Bellows, H. W., 63, 74, 76, 115, 116, 118, 184

Blake, Wm., quoted, 299

Boston, 17

Brace, C. L., 226

Brazer, John, 43

Broad Church, 71, 257, etc.

Brook Farm, 136, 227, 235, 236, 239, 240, 241, 244

Brown, John, 104

Browning, R., 4, 16, 145, 201

Brownson, Orestes, 203


C

Calvinism, 1

Carlyle, 7, 124

Carter, R., 226

Cary, Alice, 225

Cary, Phoébe, 225

Chadwick, J. W., 187

Channing, W. E., 47, 183, 186, 235, 300

Channing, W. H., 236, 300

Clarke, J. F., 44, 124

Clerical Profession, The, 146, etc.

Colonization, 181

Communion Service, 66, etc.

Comte, A., 217

Conference, Unitarian, 115-117

Curtis, G. W., 42


D

Darwin, C., 259

Deists, 61, 62

Dewey, Mary, 176

Dewey, Orville, 176, etc.

Dillaway, C. K., 20

Diman, J. L., quoted, 291

Divinity Hall, 26

Divinity School, 25-34

Dixwell, E. S., 20

Dwight, J. S., 236


E

Eliot, George, 138

Emerson, R. W., 21, 34, 42, 48, 68, 75, 122, 134, 135, 145, 166, etc., 196, 209, 245, 270, 292

Endicott, John, 36
*/
-----File: 309.png---\\terrio\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-----------------------------

/*
Ethical Religion, 267, etc.

Europe, 131

Evolution, 145, 194, 217


F

Field, H. M., 227

Fourier, C., 240

Francis, Convers, 27

Fraternity Club, 128, 129

Free Religious Association, 119, etc., 124-126, 209, 292

Free Thought in America, 133, etc.

Frothingham, Ann G., 14-17

Frothingham, N. L., 2-14


G

Gardner, F., 20

Garrison, W. L., 44

Greeley, H., 109, 226, 227

Goethe, J. W. von, quoted, 280


H

Haeckel, E., 217

Harvard College, 21

Hawthorne, N., 42, 236, 246

Heath, 131

Hecker, I. T., 226, 295

Hedge, F. H., 257

Higginson, T. W., 35, 122

Hillard, G. S., 21

Hitchcock, R. D., 226

Holland, J. G., 227


I

Independent Society, 126-131, 132, 138, 139

Ingersoll, R. G., 227, 253, etc.


J

James, H., quoted, 155

Jersey City, 63, 65

Jewett, Sarah O., quoted, 255

Joachim (Abbot), 301

Johnson, S., 50, 210, etc.

Joy, Charles, 226


K

King, T. S., 42, 191, note.

Kirwan, R., 38


L

Latin School, 19

Laveleye, E. de, quoted, 272, 281

Leverett, F. P., 20

Longfellow, H. W., 51, 258, quoted

Loring, E. G., 245

Lyric Hall, 125, 128


M

Mahomet, 124

Martineau, J., 58, 165, 185, quoted, 275, 281, 282

Masonic Temple, 127

Maurice, F. D., 123, 264

McQueary, Rev. H., 256

Minister, Office of, in War Time, 106

Ministry in New York, 131

Mott, Lucretia, 121


N

National Conference, 85

Negroes, 111, 179

Newman, F. W., 282, 299

New York, 76

"North Church," 42

Noyes, G. R., 26


O

Osgood, S., 92, etc.
*/
-----File: 310.png---\\mehoo80027\\fsmwalb\Scribe\-------------------------

/*
P

Paine, T., 248, etc.

Parker, T., 44, 54, etc., 70, 122, 134, 135, 203, 233, 282

Phillips, W., 9, 44, 292

Poe, E. A., quoted, 134

Prescott, W. H., 6, 21

Priests in the Riot, 113

<i>Prospective Review</i>, 299

Protestantism, 275, 277

Putnam, Eleanor, 36


R

Reid, Whitelaw, 227

Renan, J. Ernest, 58, 272-274, 276,279, 293

Riot in New York, 107, etc.

Ripley, George, 227

Romanism, 273, etc.

Rood, O. N., 226

Royce, J., 282

Runkle, Mrs. Lucia, 227

S


Salem, 35, etc., 51

Sanitary Commission, 83

Scherb, E. V., 51

Schwegler, A., 57

Slavery, 47

Smith, S., 207

Stearns, G., 245

Stephen, Leslie, quoted, 249

Strauss, D. F., 217, 280

Sumner, C., 21, 221


T

Taine, H. A., 217

Taylor, Bayard, 226

Thackeray, W. M., 8

Ticknor, G., 6, 21

Torrey, H. W., 20

Transcendentalism, 47, 135-137, 214

Tbingen School, 57

Tyndall, J., 217, 297


U

Unitarianism, 256, 278

Unitarians, 47, 69, 102, 115, 117, 124, 183, 266


V

Voltaire, 62

W

War, Civil, The, 114

Washburn, E. A., 227

Washington, George (Gen.), 105

Washington, L. W., (Col.), 105

Wasson, D. A., 60, 119, 122

Webster, D., 21, 180

Webster, J. W., 22

Weiss, J., 122, 190, etc., 284, misquoted

<i>Westminster Review</i>, 299

White, R. G. 226

Williams, R., 36

Winthrop, T., 110

Wise, H. A. (Gov.), 104

Woman, Rights of, 221


Y

Youmans, E. L., 226


Z

Zeller, E., 58
*/